THE CORRESPONDENCE OF THOMAS CARLYLE AND RALPH WALDO EMERSON


"To my friend I write a letter, and from him I receive a letter.
It is a spiritual gift, worthy of him to give, and of me to
receive."--Emerson

"What the writer did actually mean, the thing he then thought of,
the thing he then was."--Carlyle


I.  Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Sir,--There are some purposes we delay long to execute
simply because we have them more at heart than others, and such
an one has been for many weeks, I may say months, my design of
writing you an epistle.

Some chance wind of Fame blew your name to me, perhaps two years
ago, as the author of papers which I had already distinguished
(as indeed it was very easy to do) from the mass of English
periodical criticism as by far the most original and profound
essays of the day,--the works of a man of Faith as well as
Intellect, sportive as well as learned, and who, belonging to the
despairing and deriding class of philosophers, was not ashamed to
hope and to speak sincerely.  Like somebody in _Wilhelm Meister_,
I said:  This person has come under obligations to me and to all
whom he has enlightened.  He knows not how deeply I should grieve
at his fall, if, in that exposed England where genius always
hears the Devil's whisper, "All these kingdoms will I give thee,"
his virtue also should be an initial growth put off with age.
When therefore I found myself in Europe, I went to your house
only to say, "Faint not,--the word you utter is heard, though in
the ends of the earth and by humblest men;  it works, prevails."
Drawn by strong regard to one of my teachers I went to see his
person, and as he might say his environment at Craigenputtock.
Yet it was to fulfil my duty, finish my mission, not with much
hope of gratifying him,--in the spirit of "If I love you, what is
that to you?"  Well, it happened to me that I was delighted with
my visit, justified to myself in my respect, and many a time upon
the sea in my homeward voyage I remembered with joy the favored
condition of my lonely philosopher, his happiest wedlock, his
fortunate temper, his steadfast simplicity, his all means of
happiness;--not that I had the remotest hope that he should so
far depart from his theories as to expect happiness.  On my
arrival at home I rehearsed to several attentive ears what I had
seen and heard, and they with joy received it.

In Liverpool I wrote to Mr. Fraser to send me Magazine, and I
have now received four numbers of the _Sartor Resartus,_ for
whose light thanks evermore.  I am glad that one living scholar
is self-centred, and will be true to himself though none ever
were before;  who, as Montaigne says, "puts his ear close by
himself, and holds his breath and listens."  And none can be
offended with the self-subsistency of one so catholic and jocund.
And 't is good to have a new eye inspect our mouldy social forms,
our politics, and schools, and religion.  I say _our,_ for it
cannot have escaped you that a lecture upon these topics written
for England may be read to America.  Evermore thanks for the
brave stand you have made for Spiritualism in these writings.
But has literature any parallel to the oddity of the vehicle
chosen to convey this treasure?  I delight in the contents;  the
form, which my defective apprehension for a joke makes me not
appreciate, I leave to your merry discretion.  And yet did ever
wise and philanthropic author use so defying a diction?  As if
society were not sufficiently shy of truth without providing it
beforehand with an objection to the form.  Can it be that this
humor proceeds from a despair of finding a contemporary audience,
and so the Prophet feels at liberty to utter his message in droll
sounds.  Did you not tell me, Mr. Thomas Carlyle, sitting upon
one of your broad hills, that it was Jesus Christ built Dunscore
Kirk yonder?  If you love such sequences, then admit, as you
will, that no poet is sent into the world before his time;  that
all the departed thinkers and actors have paved your way;  that
(at least when you surrender yourself) nations and ages do guide
your pen, yes, and common goose-quills as well as your diamond
graver.  Believe then that harp and ear are formed by one
revolution of the wheel;  that men are waiting to hear your
epical song;  and so be pleased to skip those excursive involved
glees, and give us the simple air, without the volley of
variations.  At least in some of your prefaces you should give us
the theory of your rhetoric.  I comprehend not why you should
lavish in that spendthrift style of yours celestial truths.
Bacon and Plato have something too solid to say than that they
can afford to be humorists.  You are dispensing that which is
rarest, namely, the simplest truths,--truths which lie next to
consciousness, and which only the Platos and Goethes perceive.  I
look for the hour with impatience when the vehicle will be worthy
of the spirit,--when the word will be as simple, and so as
resistless, as the thought,--and, in short, when your words
will be one with things.  I have no hope that you will find
suddenly a large audience.  Says not the sarcasm, "Truth hath
the plague in his house"?  Yet all men are _potentially_ (as
Mr. Coleridge would say) your audience, and if you will not
in very Mephistophelism repel and defy them, shall be actually;
and whatever the great or the small may say about the charm of
diabolism, a true and majestic genius can afford to despise it.

I venture to amuse you with this homiletic criticism because it
is the sense of uncritical truth seekers, to whom you are no more
than Hecuba, whose instincts assure them that there is Wisdom in
this grotesque Teutonic apocalyptic strain of yours, but that 't
is hence hindered in its effect.  And though with all my heart I
would stand well with my Poet, yet if I offend I shall quietly
retreat into my Universal relations, wherefrom I affectionately
espy you as a man, myself as another.

And yet before I come to the end of my letter I may repent of my
temerity and unsay my charge.  For are not all our circlets of
will as so many little eddies rounded in by the great Circle of
Necessity, and _could_ the Truth-speaker, perhaps now the best
Thinker of the Saxon race, have written otherwise?  And must
not we say that Drunkenness is a virtue rather than that Cato
has erred?

I wish I could gratify you with any pleasing news of the
regeneration, education, prospects, of man in this continent.
But your philanthropy is so patient, so far-sighted, that present
evils give you less solicitude.  In the last six years government
in the United States has been fast becoming a job, like great
charities.  A most unfit person in the Presidency has been doing
the worst things;  and the worse he grew, the more popular.  Now
things seem to mend.  Webster, a good man and as strong as if he
were a sinner, begins to find himself the centre of a great and
enlarging party and his eloquence incarnated and enacted by them;
yet men dare not hope that the majority shall be suddenly
unseated.  I send herewith a volume of Webster's that you may see
his speech on Foot's Resolutions, a speech which the Americans
have never done   praising.  I have great doubts whether the book
reaches you, as I know not my agents.  I shall put with it the
little book of my Swedenborgian druggist, of whom I told you.
And if, which is hardly to be hoped, any good book should be
thrown out of our vortex of trade and politics, I shall not fail
to give it the same direction.

I need not tell you, my dear sir, what pleasure a letter from you
would give me when you have a few moments to spare to so remote a
friend.  If any word in my letter should provoke you to a reply,
I shall rejoice in my sauciness.  I am spending the summer in the
country, but my address is Boston, care of Barnard, Adams, & Co.
Care of O. Rich, London.  Please do make my affectionate respects
to Mrs. Carlyle, whose kindness I shall always gratefully
remember.  I depend upon her intercession to insure your writing
to me.  May God grant you both his best blessing.

Your friend,
R. Waldo Emerson




II.  Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Sir,--Some two weeks ago I received your kind gift from
Fraser.  To say that it was welcome would be saying little:  is
it not as a voice of affectionate remembrance, coming from beyond
the Ocean waters, first decisively announcing for me that a whole
New Continent _exists,_--that I too have part and lot there!
"Not till we can think that here and there one is thinking of us,
one is loving us, does this waste Earth become a peopled Garden."
Among the figures I can recollect as visiting our Nithsdale
hermitage,--all like _Apparitions_ now, bringing with them airs
from Heaven or else blasts from the other region,--there is
perhaps not one of a more undoubtedly supernal character than
yourself:  so pure and still, with intents so charitable;  and
then vanishing too so soon into the azure Inane, as an Apparition
should!  Never has your Address in my Notebook met my eye but
with a friendly influence.  Judge if I am glad to know that
there, in Infinite Space, you still hold by me.

I have read in both your books at leisure times, and now nearly
finished the smaller one.  He is a faithful thinker, that
Swedenborgian Druggist of yours, with really deep ideas, who
makes me too pause and think, were it only to consider what
manner of man he must be, and what manner of thing, after all,
Swedenborgianism must be.  "Through the smallest window look
well, and you can look out into the Infinite."  Webster also I
can recognize a sufficient, effectual man, whom one must wish
well to, and prophesy well of.  The sound of him is nowise
poetic-rhythmic;  it is clear, one-toned, you might say metallic,
yet distinct, significant, not without melody.  In his face,
above all, I discern that "indignation" which, if it do not make
"verses," makes _useful_ way in the world.  The higher such a man
rises, the better pleased I shall be.  And so here, looking
over the water, let me repeat once more what I believe is
already dimly the sentiment of all Englishmen, Cisoceanic and
Transoceanic, that we and you are not two countries, and cannot
for the life of us be;  but only two _parishes_ of one country,
with such wholesome parish hospitalities, and dirty temporary
parish feuds, as we see;  both of which brave parishes _Vivant!
vivant!_  And among the glories of _both_ be Yankee-doodle-doo,
and the Felling of the Western Forest, proudly remembered;  and
for the rest, by way of parish constable, let each cheerfully
take such George Washington or George Guelph as it can get, and
bless Heaven!  I am weary of hearing it said, "We love the
Americans,"  "We wish well," &c., &c.  What in God's name should
we do else?

You thank me for _Teufelsdrockh;_  how much more ought I to thank
you for your hearty, genuine, though extravagant acknowledgment
of it!  Blessed is the voice that amid dispiritment, stupidity,
and contradiction proclaims to us, _Euge!_  Nothing ever was more
ungenial than the soil this poor Teufelsdrockhish seed-corn has
been thrown on here;  none cries, Good speed to it;  the sorriest
nettle or hemlock seed, one would think, had been more welcome.
For indeed our British periodical critics, and especially
the public of _Fraser's_ Magazine (which I believe I have now
done with), exceed all speech;  require not even contempt,
only oblivion.  Poor Teufelsdrockh!--Creature of mischance,
miscalculation, and thousand-fold obstruction!  Here nevertheless
he is, as you see;  has struggled across the Stygian marshes, and
now, as a stitched pamphlet "for Friends," cannot be _burnt_ or
lost before his time.  I send you one copy for your own behoof;
three others you yourself can perhaps find fit readers for:  as
you spoke in the plural number, I thought there might be three;
more would rather surprise me.  From the British side of the
water I have met simply one intelligent response,--clear, true,
though almost enthusiastic as your own.  My British Friend too is
utterly a stranger, whose very name I know not, who did not
print, but only write, and to an unknown third party.  Shall I
say then, "In the mouth of two witnesses"?  In any case, God be
thanked, I am done with it;  can wash my hands of it, and send it
forth;  sure that the Devil will get his full share of it,
and not a whit more, clutch as he may.  But as for you, my
Transoceanic brothers, read this earnestly, for it _was_
earnestly meant and written, and contains no _voluntary_
falsehood of mine.  For the rest, if you dislike it, say that I
wrote it four years ago, and could not now so write it, and on
the whole (as Fritz the Only said) "will do better another time."
With regard to style and so forth, what you call your "saucy"
objections are not only most intelligible to me, but welcome and
instructive.  You say well that I take up that attitude because I
have no known public, am alone under the heavens, speaking into
friendly or unfriendly space;  add only, that I will not defend
such attitude, that I call it questionable, tentative, and only
the best that I, in these mad times, could conveniently hit upon.
For you are to know, my view is that now at last we have lived to
see all manner of Poetics and Rhetorics and Sermonics, and one
may say generally all manner of _Pulpits_ for addressing mankind
from, as good as broken and abolished:  alas, yes! if you have
any earnest meaning which demands to be not only listened to, but
_believed_ and _done,_ you cannot (at least I cannot) utter it
_there,_ but the sound sticks in my throat, as when a solemnity
were _felt_ to have become a mummery;  and so one leaves the
pasteboard coulisses, and three unities, and Blair's Lectures,
quite behind;  and feels only that there is _nothing sacred,_
then, but the _Speech of Man_ to believing Men!  This, come what
will, was, is, and forever must be _sacred;_  and will one day,
doubtless, anew environ itself with fit modes;  with solemnities
that are _not_ mummeries.  Meanwhile, however, is it not
pitiable?  For though Teufelsdrockh exclaims, "Pulpit! canst thou
not make a pulpit by simply _inverting the nearest tub?_" yet,
alas! he does not sufficiently reflect that it is still only a
tub, that the most inspired utterance will come from _it,_
inconceivable, misconceivable, to the million;  questionable (not
of _ascertained_ significance) even to the few.  Pity us
therefore;  and with your just shake of the head join a
sympathetic, even a hopeful smile.  Since I saw you I have been
trying, am still trying, other methods, and shall surely get
nearer the truth, as I honestly strive for it.  Meanwhile, I know
no method of much consequence, except that of _believing,_ of
being _sincere:_  from Homer and the Bible down to the poorest
Burns's Song, I find no other Art that promises to be perennial.

But now quitting theoretics, let me explain what you long to
know, how it is that I date from London.  Yes, my friend, it is
even so:  Craigenputtock now stands solitary in the wilderness,
with none but an old woman and foolish grouse-destroyers in it;
and we for the last ten weeks, after a fierce universal
disruption, are here with our household gods.  Censure not;  I
came to London for the best of all reasons,--to seek bread and
work.  So it literally stands;  and so do I literally stand with
the hugest, gloomiest Future before me, which in all sane moments
I good-humoredly defy.  A strange element this, and I as good as
an Alien in it.  I care not for Radicalism, for Toryism, for
Church, Tithes, or the "Confusion" of useful Knowledge.  Much
as I can speak and hear, I am alone, alone.  My brave Father,
now victorious from his toil, was wont to pray in evening
worship:  "Might we say, We are not alone, for God is with us!"
Amen! Amen!

I brought a manuscript with me of another curious sort, entitled
_The Diamond Necklace._  Perhaps it will be printed soon as an
Article, or even as a separate Booklet,--a _queer_ production,
which you shall see.  Finally, I am busy, constantly studying
with my whole might for a Book on the French Revolution.  It is
part of my creed that the Only Poetry is History, could we tell
it right.  This truth (if it prove one) I have not yet got to the
limitations of;  and shall in no way except by _trying_ it in
practice.  The story of the Necklace was the first attempt at
an experiment.

My sheet is nearly done;  and I have still to complain of you for
telling me nothing of yourself except that you are in the
country.  Believe that I want to know much and all.  My wife too
remembers you with unmixed friendliness;  bids me send you her
kindest wishes.  Understand too that your old bed stands in a new
room here, and the old welcome at the door.  Surely we shall see
you in London one day.  Or who knows but Mahomet may go to the
mountain?  It occasionally rises like a mad prophetic dream in
me, that I might end in the Western Woods!

From Germany I get letters, messages, and even visits;  but now
no tidings, no influences, of moment.  Goethe's Posthumous Works
are all published;  and Radicalism (poor hungry, yet inevitable
Radicalism!) is the order of the day.  The like, and even more,
from France.  Gustave d'Eichthal (did you hear?) has gone over to
Greece, and become some kind of Manager under King Otho.

Continue to love me, you and my other friends;  and as packets
sail so swiftly, let me know it frequently.  All good be
with you!

Most faithfully,
T. Carlyle

Coleridge, as you doubtless hear, is gone.  How great a Possibility,
how small a realized Result!  They are delivering Orations about
him, and emitting other kinds of froth, _ut mos est._  What hurt
can it do?




III.  Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Sir,--Your letter, which I received last week, made a
bright light in a solitary and saddened place.  I had quite
recently received the news of the death of a brother in the
island of Porto Rico, whose loss to me will be a lifelong sorrow.
As he passes out of sight, come to me visible as well as
spiritual tokens of a fraternal friendliness which, by its own
law, transcends the tedious barriers of custom and nation;  and
opens its way to the heart.  This is a true consolation, and I
thanked my jealous [Greek] for the godsend so significantly
timed.  It, for the moment, realizes the hope to which I have
clung with both hands, through each disappointment, that I might
converse with a man whose ear of faith was not stopped, and whose
argument I could not predict.  May I use the word, "I thank my
God whenever I call you to remembrance."

I receive with great pleasure the wonderful Professor now that
first the decent limbs of Osiris are collected.  We greet him
well to Cape Cod and Boston Bay.  The rigid laws of matter
prohibit that the soul imprisoned within the strait edges of
these types should add one syllable thereto, or we had adjured
the Sage by every name of veneration to take possession by so
much as a Salve! of his Western World, but he remained inexorable
for any new communications.

I feel like congratulating you upon the cold welcome which you
say Teufelsdrockh has met.  As it is not earthly happy, it is
marked of a high sacred sort.  I like it a great deal better than
ever, and before it was all published I had eaten nearly all my
words of objection.  But do not think it shall lack a present
popularity.  That it should not be known seems possible, for if a
memoir of Laplace had been thrown into that muck-heap of Fraser's
Magazine, who would be the wiser?  But this has too much wit and
imagination not to strike a class who would not care for it as a
faithful mirror of this very Hour.  But you know the proverb, "To
be fortunate, be not too wise."  The great men of the day are on
a plane so low as to be thoroughly intelligible to the vulgar.
Nevertheless, as God maketh the world forevermore, whatever the
devils may seem to do, so the thoughts of the best minds always
become the last opinion of Society.  Truth is ever born in a
manger, but is compensated by living till it has all souls for
its kingdom.  Far, far better seems to me the unpopularity of
this Philosophical Poem (shall I call it?) than the adulation
that followed your eminent friend Goethe.  With him I am becoming
better acquainted, but mine must be a qualified admiration.  It
is a singular piece of good-nature in you to apotheosize him.  I
cannot but regard it as his misfortune, with conspicuous bad
influence on his genius, that velvet life he led.  What
incongruity for genius, whose fit ornaments and reliefs are
poverty and hatred, to repose fifty years on chairs of state and
what pity that his Duke did not cut off his head to save him from
the mean end (forgive) of retiring from the municipal incense "to
arrange tastefully his gifts and medals"!  Then the Puritan in me
accepts no apology for bad morals in such as he.  We can tolerate
vice in a splendid nature whilst that nature is battling with the
brute majority in defence of some human principle.  The sympathy
his manhood and his misfortunes call out adopts even his faults;
but genius pampered, acknowledged, crowned, can only retain our
sympathy by turning the same force once expended against outward
enemies now against inward, and carrying forward and planting the
standard of Oromasdes so many leagues farther on into the envious
Dark.  Failing this, it loses its nature and becomes talent,
according to the definition,--mere skill in attaining vulgar
ends.  A certain wonderful friend of mine said that "a false
priest is the falsest of false things."  But what makes the
priest?  A cassock?  O Diogenes!  Or the power (and thence the
call) to teach man's duties as they flow from the Superhuman?  Is
not he who perceives and proclaims the Superhumanities, he who
has once intelligently pronounced the words "Self-Renouncement,"
"Invisible Leader," "Heavenly Powers of Sorrow," and so on,
forever the liege of the same?

Then to write luxuriously is not the same thing as to live so,
but a new and worse offence.  It implies an intellectual defect
also, the not perceiving that the present corrupt condition of
human nature (which condition this harlot muse helps to
perpetuate) is a temporary or superficial state.  The good word
lasts forever:  the impure word can only buoy itself in the gross
gas that now envelops us, and will sink altogether to ground as
that works itself clear in the everlasting effort of God.

May I not call it temporary? for when I ascend into the pure
region of truth (or under my undermost garment, as Epictetus and
Teufelsdrockh would say), I see that to abide inviolate, although
all men fall away from it;  yea, though the whole generation of
Adam should be healed as a sore off the face of the creation.
So, my friend, live Socrates and Milton, those starch Puritans,
for evermore!  Strange is it to me that you should not sympathize
(yet so you said) with Socrates, so ironical, so true, and who
"tramped in the mire with wooden shoes whenever they would force
him into the clouds."  I seem to see him offering the hand to you
across the ages which some time you will grasp.

I am glad you like Sampson Reed, and that he has inspired some
curiosity respecting his Church.  Swedenborgianism, if you should
be fortunate in your first meetings, has many points of
attraction for you:  for instance, this article, "The poetry of
the Old Church is the reality of the New," which is to be
literally understood, for they esteem, in common with all the
Trismegisti, the Natural World as strictly the symbol or exponent
of the Spiritual, and part for part;  the animals to be the
incarnations of certain affections;  and scarce a popular
expression esteemed figurative, but they affirm to be the
simplest statement of fact.  Then is their whole theory of social
relations--both in and out of the body--most philosophical, and,
though at variance with the popular theology, self-evident.  It
is only when they come to their descriptive theism, if I may say
so, and then to their drollest heaven, and to some autocratic not
moral decrees of God, that the mythus loses me.  In general, too,
they receive the fable instead of the moral of their Aesop.  They
are to me, however, deeply interesting, as a sect which I think
must contribute more than all other sects to the new faith which
must arise out of all.

You express a desire to know something of myself.  Account me "a
drop in the ocean seeking another drop," or God-ward, striving to
keep so true a sphericity as to receive the due ray from every
point of the concave heaven.  Since my return home, I have been
left very much at leisure.  It were long to tell all my
speculations on my profession and my doings thereon;  but,
possessing my liberty, I am determined to keep it, at the risk of
uselessness (which risk God can very well abide), until such
duties offer themselves as I can with integrity discharge.  One
thing I believe,--that Utterance is place enough:  and should I
attain through any inward revelation to a more clear perception
of my assigned task, I shall embrace it with joy and praise.  I
shall not esteem it a low place, for instance, if I could
strengthen your hands by true expressions of the hope and
pleasure which your writings communicate to me and to some of my
countrymen.  Yet the best poem of the Poet is his own mind, and
more even than in any of the works I rejoice in the promise of
the workman.  Now I am only reading and musing, and when I have
any news to tell of myself, you shall hear them.

Now as to the welcome hint that you might come to America, it
shall be to me a joyful hope.  Come and found a new Academy that
shall be church and school and Parnassus, as a true Poet's house
should be.  I dare not say that wit has better chance here than
in England of winning world-wages, but it can always live, and it
can scarce find competition.  Indeed, indeed, you shall have the
continent to yourself were it only as Crusoe was king.  If you
cared to read literary lectures, our people have vast curiosity,
and the apparatus is very easy to set agoing.  Such 'pulpit' as
you pleased to erect would at least find no hindrance in the
building.  A friend of mine and of yours remarked, when I
expressed the wish that you would come here, "that people were
not here, as in England, sacramented to organized schools of
opinion, but were a far more convertible audience."  If at all
you can think of coming here, I would send you any and all
particulars of information with cheerfulest speed.

I have written a very long letter, yet have said nothing of much
that I would say upon chapters of the _Sartor._  I must keep
that, and the thoughts I had upon 'poetry in history',' for
another letter, or (might it be!) for a dialogue face to face.

Let me not fail of _The Diamond Necklace._  I found three greedy
receivers of Teufelsdrockh, who also radiate its light.  For the
sake of your knowing what manner of men you move, I send you two
pieces writ by one of them, Frederic Henry Hedge, the article on
Swedenborg and that on Phrenology.  And as you like Sampson Reed,
here are one or two more of his papers.  Do read them.  And since
you study French history do not fail to look at our Yankee
portrait of Lafayette.  Present my best remembrances to Mrs.
Carlyle, whom that stern and blessed solitude has armed and
sublimed out of all reach of the littleness and unreason of
London.  If I thought we could win her to the American shore, I
would send her the story of those godly women, the contemporaries
of John Knox's daughter, who came out hither to enjoy the worship
of God amidst wild men and wild beasts.

Your friend and servant,
R. Waldo Emerson




IV. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Sir,--I owe you a speedy answer as well as a grateful
one;  for, in spite of the swift ships of the Americans, our
communings pass too slowly.  Your letter, written in November,
did not reach me till a few days ago;  your Books or Papers have
not yet come,--though the ever-punctual Rich, I can hope, will
now soon get them for me.  He showed me his _way-bill_ or
invoice, and the consignment of these friendly effects "to
another gentleman," and undertook with an air of great fidelity
to bring all to a right bearing.  On the whole, as the Atlantic
is so broad and deep, ought we not rather to esteem it a
beneficent miracle that messages can arrive at all;  that a
little slip of paper will skim over all these weltering floods,
and other inextricable confusions, and come at last, in the hand
of the Twopenny Postman, safe to your lurking-place, like green
leaf in the bill of Noah's Dove?  Let us be grateful for mercies;
let us use them while they are granted us.  Time was when "they
that feared the Lord spake _often_ one to another."  A friendly
thought is the purest gift that man can afford to man.  "Speech"
also, they say, "is cheerfuler than light itself."

The date of your letter gives me unhappily no idea but that of
Space and Time.  As you know my whereabout, will you throw a
little light on your own?  I can imagine Boston, and have often
seen the musket volleys on Bunker Hill;  but in this new spot
there is nothing for me save sky and earth, the chance of
retirement, peace, and winter seclusion.  Alas!  I can too well
fancy one other thing:  the bereavement you allude to, the sorrow
that will so long be painful before it can become merely sad and
sacred.  Brothers, especially in these days, are much to us:  had
one no brother, one could hardly understand what it was to have a
Friend;  they are the Friends whom Nature chose for us;  Society
and Fortune, as things now go, are scarcely compatible with
Friendship, and contrive to get along, miserably enough, without
it.  Yet sorrow not above measure for him that is gone.  He is,
in very deed and truth, with God,--_where_ you and I both are.
What a thin film it is that divides the Living from the Dead!  In
still nights, as Jean Paul says, "the limbs of my Buried Ones
touched cold on my soul, and drove away its blots, as dead hands
heal eruptions of the skin."  Let us turn back into Life.

That you sit there bethinking yourself, and have yet taken no
course of activity, and can without inward or outward hurt so
sit, is on the whole rather pleasing news to me.  It is a great
truth which you say, that Providence can well afford to have one
sit:  another great truth which you feel without saying it is
that a course wherein clear faith cannot go with you may be worse
than none;  if clear faith go never so slightly against it, then
it is certainly worse than none.  To speak with perhaps ill-bred
candor, I like as well to fancy you _not_ preaching to Unitarians
a Gospel after their heart.  I will say farther, that you are the
only man I ever met with of that persuasion whom I could
unobstructedly like.  The others that I have seen were all a kind
of halfway-house characters, who, I thought, should, if they had
not wanted courage, have ended in unbelief;  in "faint possible
Theism," which I like considerably worse than Atheism.  Such, I
could not but feel, deserve the fate they find here;  the bat
fate:  to be killed among the rats as a bird, among the birds as
a rat.... Nay, who knows but it is doubts of the like kind in
your own mind that keep you for a time inactive even now?  For
the rest, that you have liberty to choose by your own will
merely, is a great blessing:  too rare for those that could use
it so well;  nay, often it is difficult to use.  But till _ill
health_ of body or of mind warns you that the moving, not the
sitting, position is essential, _sit_ still, contented in
conscience;  understanding well that no man, that God only knows
_what_ we are working, and will show it one day;  that such and
such a one, who filled the whole Earth with his hammering and
troweling, and would not let men pass for his rubbish, turns out
to have built of mere coagulated froth, and vanishes with his
edifice, traceless, silently, or amid hootings illimitable;
while again that other still man, by the word of his mouth, by
the very look of his face, was scattering influences, as _seeds_
are scattered, "to be found flourishing as a banyan grove after a
thousand years."  I beg your pardon for all this preaching, if it
be superfluous impute it to no miserable motive.

Your objections to Goethe are very natural, and even bring you
nearer me:  nevertheless, I am by no means sure that it were not
your wisdom, at this moment, to set about learning the German
Language, with a view towards studying _him_ mainly!  I do not
assert this;  but the truth of it would not surprise me.  Believe
me, it is impossible you can be more a Puritan than I;  nay, I
often feel as if I were far too much so:  but John Knox himself,
could he have seen the peaceable impregnable _fidelity_ of that
man's mind, and how to him also Duty was _infinite,_--Knox would
have passed on, wondering not reproaching.  But I will tell you
in a word why I like Goethe:  his is the only _healthy_ mind,
of any extent, that I have discovered in Europe for long
generations;  it was he that first convincingly proclaimed to me
(convincingly, for I saw it _done_):  Behold, even in this
scandalous Sceptico-Epicurean generation, when all is gone but
hunger and cant, it is still possible that Man be a Man!  For
which last Evangel, the confirmation and rehabilitation of all
other Evangels whatsoever, how can I be too grateful?  On the
whole, I suspect you yet know only Goethe the Heathen (Ethnic);
but you will know Goethe the Christian by and by, and like that
one far better.  Rich showed me a Compilation in green cloth
boards that you had beckoned across the water:  pray read the
fourth volume of that, and let a man of your clearness of feeling
say whether that was a Parasite or a Prophet.--And then as to
"misery" and the other dark ground on which you love to see
genius paint itself,--alas! consider whether misery is not _ill
health_ too;  also whether good fortune is not worse to bear than
bad;  and on the whole whether the glorious serene summer is not
greater than the wildest hurricane,--as Light, the Naturalists
say, is stronger a thousand times than Lightning.  And so I
appeal to Philip sober;--and indeed have hardly said as much
about Goethe since I saw you, for nothing reigns here but
twilight delusion (falser for the time than midnight darkness) on
that subject, and I feel that the most suffer nothing thereby,
having properly nothing or little to do with such a matter but
with you, who are not "seeking recipes for happiness," but
something far higher, it is not so, and _therefore_ I have spoken
and appealed;  and hope the new curiosity, if I have awakened
any, will do you no mischief.

But now as to myself;  for you will grumble at a sheet of
speculation sent so far:  I am here still, as Rob Roy was on
Glasgow Bridge, _biding tryste;_  busy extremely, with work that
will not profit me at all in some senses;  suffering rather in
health and nerves;  and still with nothing like dawn on any
quarter of my horizon.  _The Diamond Necklace_ has not been
printed, but will be, were this _French Revolution_ out;  which
latter, however, drags itself along in a way that would fill your
benevolent heart with pity.  I am for three small volumes now,
and have one done.  It is the dreadfulest labor (with these
nerves, this liver) I ever undertook;  all is so inaccurate,
superficial, vague, in the numberless books I consult;  and
without accuracy at least, what other good is possible?  Add to
this that I have no hope about the thing, except only that I
_shall be done with it:_  I can reasonably expect nothing from
any considerable class here, but at _best_ to be scolded and
reproached;  perhaps to be left standing "on my own basis,"
without note or comment of any kind, save from the Bookseller,
who will lose his printing.  The hope I have however is sure:  if
life is lent me, I shall be _done with_ the business;  I will
write this "History of Sansculottism," the notablest phenomenon I
meet with since the time of the Crusades or earlier;  after which
my part is played.  As for the future, I heed it little when so
busy;  but it often seems to me as if one thing were becoming
indisputable:  that I must seek another craft than literature for
these years that may remain to me. Surely, I often say, if ever
man had a finger-of-Providence shown him, thou hast it;  literature
will neither yield thee bread, nor a stomach to digest bread with:
quit it in God's name, shouldst thou take spade and mattock instead.
The truth is, I believe literature to be as good as dead and gone
in all parts of Europe at this moment, and nothing but hungry
Revolt and Radicalism appointed us for perhaps three generations;
I do not see how a man can honestly live by writing in another
dialect than that, in England at least;  so that if you determine
on not living dishonestly, it will behove you to look several
things full in the face, and ascertain what is what with some
distinctness.  I suffer also terribly from the solitary existence
I have all along had;  it is becoming a kind of passion with me,
to feel myself among my brothers.  And then, How?  Alas!  I
care not a doit for Radicalism, nay I feel it to be a wretched
necessity, unfit for me;  Conservatism being not unfit only
but false for me:  yet these two are the grand Categories
under which all English spiritual activity that so much as
thinks remuneration possible must range itself.  I look
around accordingly on a most wonderful vortex of things;  and
pray to God only, that as my day, is so my strength may be.
What will come out of it is wholly uncertain:  for I have
possibilities too;  the possibilities of London are far from
exhausted yet:  I have a brave brother, who invites me to
come and be quiet with him in Rome;  a brave friend (known to
you) who opens the door of a new Western world,--and so we will
stand considering and consulting, at least till the Book be over.
Are all these things interesting to you?  I know they are.

As for America and Lecturing, it is a thing I do sometimes turn
over, but never yet with any seriousness.  What your friend says
of the people being more persuadable, so far, as having no
Tithe-controversy, &c., &c. will go, I can most readily understand
it.  But apart from that, I should rather fancy America mainly a
new Commercial England, with a fuller pantry,--little more or little
less.  The same unquenchable, almost frightfully unresting spirit
of endeavor, directed (woe is me!) to the making of money, or
money's worth;  namely, food finer and finer, and gigmanic
renown higher and higher:  nay, must not your gigmanity be a
_purse_-gigmanity, some half-shade worse than a purse-and-pedigree
one?  Or perhaps it is not a whit worse;  only rougher, more
substantial;  on the whole better?  At all events ours is fast
becoming identical with it;  for the pedigree ingredient is as
near as may be gone:  _Gagnez de l'argent, et ne vous faites pas
pendre,_ this is very nearly the whole Law, first Table and
second.  So that you see, when I set foot on American land, it
will be on no Utopia;  but on a _conditional_ piece of ground
where some things are to be expected and other things not.  I may
say, on the other hand, that Lecturing (or I would rather it were
_speaking_) is a thing I have always had some hankering after:
it seems to me I could really _swim_ in that element, were I once
thrown into it;  that in fact it would develop several things in
me which struggle violently for development.  The great want I
have towards such an enterprise is one you may guess at:  want of
a _rubric,_ of a title to name my speech by.  Could any one but
appoint me Lecturing Professor of Teufelsdrockh's science,--
"Things in general"!  To discourse of Poets and Poetry in the
Hazlitt style, or talk stuff about the Spirit of the Age, were
most unedifying:  one knows not what to call himself.  However,
there is no doubt that were the child born it _might_ be
christened;  wherefore I will really request you to take the
business into your consideration, and give me in the most
rigorous sober manner you can some scheme of it.  How many
Discourses;  what Towns;  the probable Expenses, the probable net
Income, the Time, &c., &c.:  all that you can suppose a man
wholly ignorant might want to know about it.  America I should
like well enough to visit, much as I should another part of my
native country:  it is, as you see, distinctly possible that such
a thing might be;  we will keep it hanging, to solace ourselves
with it, till the time decide.

Have I involved you in double postage by this loquacity? or What
is your American rule?  I did not intend it when I began;  but
today my confusion of head is very great and words must be
multiplied with only a given quantity of meaning.

My wife, who is just gone out to spend the day with a certain
"celebrated Mrs. Austin," (called also the "celebrated Translatress
of Puckler-Muskau,") charged me very specially to send you
her love, her good wishes and thanks:  I assure you there
is no hypocrisy in that.  She votes often for taking the
Transatlantic scheme into contemplation;  declares farther that
my Book and Books must and will indisputably prosper (at some
future era), and takes the world beside me--as a good wife and
daughter of John Knox should.  Speaking of "celebrated" persons
here, let me mention that I have learned by stern experience, as
children do with fire, to keep in general quite out of the way of
celebrated persons, more especially celebrated women.  This Mrs.
Austin, who is half ruined by celebrity (of a kind), is the only
woman I have seen not wholly ruined by it.  Men, strong men, I
have seen die of it, or go mad by it.  _Good_ fortune is far
worse than bad!

Will you write with all despatch, my dear sir;  fancy me a
fellow-wayfarer, who cordially bids you God-speed, and would
fain keep in sight of you, within sound of you.

Yours with great sincerity,
T. Carlyle




V.  Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Sir,--I am glad of the opportunity of Mr. Barnard's
visit to say health and peace be with you.  I esteem it the best
sign that has shone in my little section of space for many days,
that some thirty or more intelligent persons understand and
highly appreciate the _Sartor._  Dr. Channing sent to me for it
the other day, and I have since heard that he had read it with
great interest.  As soon as I go into town I shall see him and
measure his love.  I know his genius does not and cannot engage
your attention much.  He possesses the mysterious endowment of
natural eloquence, whose effect, however intense, is limited, of
course, to personal communication.  I can see myself that his
writings, without his voice, may be meagre and feeble.  But
please love his catholicism, that at his age can relish the
_Sartor,_ born and inveterated as he is in old books.  Moreover,
he lay awake all night, he told my friend last week, because he
had learned in the evening that some young men proposed to issue
a journal, to be called _The Transcendentalist,_ as the organ of
a spiritual philosophy.  So much for our gossip of today.

But my errand is yet to tell.  Some friends here are very
desirous that Mr. Fraser should send out to a bookseller here
fifty or a hundred copies of the _Sartor._  So many we want very
much;  they would be sold at once.  If we knew that two or three
hundred would be taken up, we should reprint it now.  But we
think it better to satisfy the known inquirers for the book
first, and when they have extended the demand for it, then to
reproduce it, a naturalized Yankee.  The lovers of Teufelsdrockh
here are sufficiently enthusiastic.  I am an icicle to them.
They think England must be blind and deaf if the Professor makes
no more impression there than yet appears.  I, with the most
affectionate wishes for Thomas Carlyle's fame, am mainly bent on
securing the medicinal virtues of his book for my young
neighbors.  The good people think he overpraises Goethe.  There I
give him up to their wrath.  But I bid them mark his unsleeping
moral sentiment;  that every other moralist occasionally nods,
becomes complaisant and traditional;  but this man is without
interval on the side of equity and humanity!  I am grieved for
you, O wise friend, that you cannot put in your own contemptuous
disclaimer of such puritanical pleas as are set up for you;  but
each creature and Levite must do after his kind.

Yet do not imagine that I will hurt you in this unseen domain of
yours by any Boswellism.  Every suffrage you get here is fairly
your own.  Nobody is coaxed to admire you, and you have won
friends whom I should be proud to show you, and honorable women
not a few.  And cannot you renew and confirm your suggestion
touching your appearance in this continent?  Ah, if I could give
your intimation the binding force of an oracular word!--in a few
months, please God, at most, I shall have wife, house, and home
wherewith and wherein to return your former hospitality.  And if
I could draw my prophet and his prophetess to brighten and
immortalize my lodge, and make it the window through which for a
summer you should look out on a field which Columbus and Berkeley
and Lafayette did not scorn to sow, my sun should shine clearer
and life would promise something better than peace.  There is a
part of ethics, or in Schleiermacher's distribution it might be
physics, which possesses all attraction for me;  to wit, the
compensations of the Universe, the equality and the coexistence
of action and reaction, that all prayers are granted, that every
debt is paid.  And the skill with which the great All maketh
clean work as it goes along, leaves no rag, consumes its smoke,--
will I hope make a chapter in your thesis.

I intimated above that we aspire to have a work on the First
Philosophy in Boston.  I hope, or wish rather.  Those that are
forward in it debate upon the name.  I doubt not in the least its
reception if the material that should fill it existed.  Through
the thickest understanding will the reason throw itself instantly
into relation with the truth that is its object, whenever that
appears.  But how seldom is the pure loadstone produced!  Faith
and love are apt to be spasmodic in the best minds:  Men live on
the brink of mysteries and harmonies into which yet they never
enter, and with their hand on the door-latch they die outside.
Always excepting my wonderful Professor, who among the living has
thrown any memorable truths into circulation?  So live and
rejoice and work, my friend, and God you aid, for the profit of
many more than your mortal eyes shall see.  Especially seek with
recruited and never-tired vision to bring back yet higher and
truer report from your Mount of Communion of the Spirit that
dwells there and creates all.  Have you received a letter from me
with a pamphlet sent in December?  Fail not, I beg of you, to
remember me to Mrs. Carlyle.

Can you not have some _Sartors_ sent?  Hilliard, Gray, & Co. are
the best publishers in Boston.  Or Mr. Rich has connections with
Burdett in Boston.

Yours with respect and affection,
                              R. Waldo Emerson




VI.   Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, 30 April, 1835

My Dear Sir,--I received your letter of the 3d of February on the
20th instant, and am sorry that hitherto we have not been able to
command a more mercantile promptitude in the transmission of
these light sheets.  If desire of a letter before it arrived, or
gladness when it came, could speed its journey, I should have it
the day it was written.  But, being come, it makes me sad and
glad by turns.  I admire at the alleged state of your English
reading public without comprehending it, and with a hoping
scepticism touching the facts.  I hear my Prophet deplore, as his
predecessors did, the deaf ear and the gross heart of his people,
and threaten to shut his lips;  but, happily, this he cannot do,
any more than could they.  The word of the Lord _will_ be spoken.
But I shall not much grieve that the English people and you are
not of the same mind if that apathy or antipathy can by any means
be the occasion of your visiting America.  The hope of this is so
pleasant to me, that I have thought of little else for the week
past, and having conferred with some friends on the matter, I
shall try, in obedience to your request, to give you a statement
of our capabilities, without indulging my penchant for the
favorable side.  Your picture of America is faithful enough:  yet
Boston contains some genuine taste for literature, and a good
deal of traditional reverence for it.  For a few years past, we
have had, every winter, several courses of lectures, scientific,
political, miscellaneous, and even some purely literary, which
were well attended.  Some lectures on Shakespeare were crowded;
and even I found much indulgence in reading, last winter, some
Biographical Lectures, which were meant for theories or portraits
of Luther, Michelangelo, Milton, George Fox, Burke.  These
courses are really given under the auspices of Societies, as
"Natural History Society," "Mechanics' Institutes," "Diffusion of
Useful Knowledge," &c., &c., and the fee to the lecturer is
inconsiderable, usually $20 for each lecture.  But in a few
instances individuals have undertaken courses of lectures, and
have been well paid.  Dr. Spurzheim received probably $3,000 in
the few months that he lived here.  Mr. Silliman, a Professor of
Yale College, has lately received something more than that for a
course of fifteen or sixteen lectures on Geology.  Private
projects of this sort are, however, always attended with a degree
of uncertainty.  The favor of my townsmen is often sudden and
spasmodic, and Mr. Silliman, who has had more success than ever
any before him, might not find a handful of hearers another
winter.  But it is the opinion of many friends whose judgment I
value, that a person of so many claims upon the ear and
imagination of our fashionable populace as the "author of the
_Life of Schiller,_" "the reviewer of _Burns's Life,_" the live
"contributor to the _Edinburgh_ and _Foreign_ Reviews," nay, the
"worshipful Teufelsdrockh," the "personal friend of Goethe,"
would, for at least one season, batter down opposition, and
command all ears on whatever topic pleased him, and that, quite
independently of the merit of his lectures, merely for so many
names' sake.

But the subject, you say, does not yet define itself.  Whilst it
is "gathering to a god," we who wait will only say, that we know
enough here of Goethe and Schiller to have some interest in
German literature.  A respectable German here, Dr. Follen, has
given lectures to a good class upon Schiller.  I am quite sure
that Goethe's name would now stimulate the curiosity of scores of
persons.  On English literature, a much larger class would have
some preparedness.  But whatever topics you might choose, I need
not say you must leave under them scope for your narrative and
pictorial powers;  yes, and space to let out all the length of
all the reins of your eloquence of moral sentiment.  What "Lay
Sermons" might you not preach! or methinks "Lectures on Europe"
were a sea big enough for you to swim in.  The only condition our
adolescent ear insists upon is, that the English as it is spoken
by the unlearned shall be the bridge between our teacher and
our tympanum.

_Income and Expenses._--All our lectures are usually delivered in
the same hall, built for the purpose.  It will hold 1,200
persons;  900 are thought a large assembly.  The expenses of
rent, lights, doorkeeper, &c. for this hall, would be $12 each
lecture.  The price of $3 is the least that might be demanded for
a single ticket of admission to the course,--perhaps $4;  $5 for
a ticket admitting a gentleman and lady.  So let us suppose we
have 900 persons paying $3 each, or $2,700.  If it should happen,
as did in Prof. Silliman's case, that many more than 900 tickets
were sold, it would be easy to give the course in the day and in
the evening, an expedient sometimes practised to divide an
audience, and because it is a great convenience to many to choose
their time.  If the lectures succeed in Boston, their success is
insured at Salem, a town thirteen miles off, with a population of
15,000.  They might, perhaps, be repeated at Cambridge, three
miles from Boston, and probably at Philadelphia, thirty-six
hours distant.

At New York anything literary has hitherto had no favor.  The
lectures might be fifteen or sixteen in number, of about an hour
each.  They might be delivered, one or two in each week.  And if
they met with sudden success, it would be easy to carry on the
course simultaneously at Salem, and Cambridge, and in the city.
They must be delivered in the winter.

Another plan suggested in addition to this.  A gentleman here is
giving a course of lectures on English literature to a private
class of ladies, at $10 to each subscriber.  There is no doubt,
were you so disposed, you might turn to account any writings in
the bottom of your portfolio, by reading lectures to such a
class, or, still better, by speaking.

_Expense of Living._--You may travel in this country for $4 to
$4.50 a day.  You may board in Boston in a "gigmanic" style for
$8 per week, including all domestic expenses.  Eight dollars per
week is the board paid by the permanent residents at the Tremont
House,--probably the best hotel in North America.  There, and at
the best hotels in New York, the lodger for a few days pays at
the rate of $1.50 per day.  Twice eight dollars would provide a
gentleman and lady with board, chamber, and private parlor, at a
fashionable boardinghouse.  In the country, of course, the
expenses are two thirds less.  These are rates of expense where
economy is not studied.  I think the Liverpool and New York
packets demand $150 of the passenger, and their accommodations
are perfect.  (N.B.--I set down all sums in dollars.  You may
commonly reckon a pound sterling worth $4.80.)  "The man is
certain of success," say those I talk with, "for one winter, but
not afterwards."  That supposes no extraordinary merit in the
lectures, and only regards you in your leonine aspect.  However,
it was suggested that, if Mr. C. would undertake a Journal of
which we have talked much, but which we have never yet produced,
he would do us great service, and we feel some confidence that it
could be made to secure him a support.  It is that project which
I mentioned to you in a letter by Mr. Barnard,--a book to be
called _The Transcendentalist,_ or _The Spiritual Inquirer,_ or
the like, and of which F.H. Hedge was to be editor.  Those
who are most interested in it designed to make gratuitous
contributions to its pages, until its success could be assured.
Hedge is just leaving our neighborhood to be settled as a
minister two hundred and fifty miles off, in Maine, and entreats
that you will edit the journal.  He will write, and I please
myself with thinking I shall be able to write under such
auspices.  Then you might (though I know not the laws respecting
literary property) collect some of your own writings and reprint
them here.  I think the _Sartor_ would now be sure of a sale.
Your _Life of Schiller,_ and _Wilhelm Meister,_ have been long
reprinted here.  At worst, if you wholly disliked us, and
preferred Old England to New, you can judge of the suggestion of
a knowing man, that you might see Niagara, get a new stock of
health, and pay all your expenses by printing in England a book
of travels in America.

I wish you to know that we do not depend for your _eclat_ on your
being already known to rich men here.  You are not.  Nothing has
ever been published here designating you by name.  But Dr.
Channing reads and respects you.  That is a fact of importance to
our project.  Several clergymen, Messrs. Frothingham, Ripley,
Francis, all of them scholars and Spiritualists, (some of them,
unluckily, called Unitarian,) love you dearly, and will work
heartily in your behalf.  Mr. Frothing ham, a worthy and
accomplished man, more like Erasmus than Luther, said to me on
parting, the other day, "You cannot express in terms too
extravagant my desire that he should come."  George Ripley,
having heard, through your letter to me, that nobody in England
had responded to the _Sartor,_ had secretly written you a most
reverential letter, which, by dint of coaxing, be read to me,
though he said there was but one step from the sublime to the
ridiculous.  I prayed him, though I thought the letter did him no
justice, save to his heart, to send you it or another;  and he
says he will.  He is a very able young man, even if his letter
should not show it.  He said he could, and would, bring many
persons to hear you, and you should be sure of his utmost aid.
Dr. Bradford, a medical man, is of good courage. Mr. Loring, a
lawyer, said,"--Invite Mr. and Mrs. Carlyle to spend a couple of
months at my house," (I assured him I was too selfish for that,)
"and if our people," he said, "cannot find out his worth, I will
subscribe, with, others, to make him whole of any expense he
shall incur in coming."  Hedge promised more than he ought.
There are several persons beside, known to me, who feel a warm
interest in this thing.  Mr. Furness, a popular and excellent
minister in Philadelphia, at whose house Harriet Martineau was
spending a few days, I learned the other day "was feeding Miss
Martineau with the _Sartor._"  And here some of the best women I
know are warm friends of yours, and are much of Mrs. Carlyle's
opinion when she says, Your books shall prosper.

On the other hand, I make no doubt you shall be sure of some
opposition.  Andrews Norton, one of our best heads, once a
theological professor, and a destroying critic, lives upon a rich
estate at Cambridge, and frigidly excludes the Diderot paper from
a _Select Journal_ edited by him, with the remark, "Another paper
of the Teufelsdrockh School."  The University perhaps, and much
that is conservative in literature and religion, I apprehend,
will give you its cordial opposition, and what eccentricity can
be collected from the Obituary Notice on Goethe, or from the
_Sartor,_ shall be mustered to demolish you.  Nor yet do I feel
quite certain of this.  If we get a good tide with us, we shall
sweep away the whole inertia, which is the whole force of these
gentlemen, except Norton.  That you do not like the Unitarians
will never hurt you at all, if possibly you do like the
Calvinists.  If you have any friendly relations to your native
Church, fail not to bring a letter from a Scottish Calvinist to a
Calvinist here, and your fortune is made.  But that were too good
to happen.

Since things are so, can you not, my dear sir, finish your new
work and cross the great water in September or October, and try
the experiment of a winter in America?  I cannot but think that
if we do not make out a case strong enough to make you build your
house, at least you should pitch your tent among us.  The country
is, as you say, worth visiting, and to give much pleasure to a
few persons will be some inducement to you.  I am afraid to
press this matter.  To me, as you can divine, it would be an
unspeakable comfort;  and the more, that I hope before that time
so far to settle my own affairs as to have a wife and a house to
receive you.  Tell Mrs. Carlyle, with my affectionate regards,
that some friends whom she does not yet know do hope with me to
have her company for the next winter at our house, and shall not
cease to hope it until you come.

I have many things to say upon the topics of your letter, but my
letter is already so immeasurably long, it must stop.  Long as it
is, I regret I have not more facts.  Dr. Channing is in New York,
or I think, despite your negligence of him, I should have visited
him on account of his interest in you.  Could you see him you
would like him.  I shall write you immediately on learning
anything new bearing on this business.  I intended to have
despatched this letter a day or two sooner, that it might go by
the packet of the 1st of May from New York.  Now it will go by
that of the 8th, and ought to reach you in thirty days.  Send me
your thoughts upon it as soon as you can.  I _jalouse_ of that
new book.  I fear its success may mar my project.

Yours affectionately,
R. Waldo Emerson




VII. Carlyle to Emerson

Thanks, my kind friend, for the news you again send me.  Good
news, good new friends;  nothing that is not good comes to me
across these waters.  As if the "Golden West" seen by Poets were
no longer a mere optical phenomenon, but growing a reality, and
coining itself into solid blessings!  To me it seems very
strange;  as indeed generally this whole Existence here below
more and more does.

We have seen your Barnard:  a most modest, intelligent, compact,
hopeful-looking man, who will not revisit you without conquests
from his expedition hither.  We expect to see much more of
him;  to instruct him, to learn of him:  especially about that
real-imaginary locality of "Concord," where a kindly-speaking
voice lives incarnated, there is much to learn.

That you will take to yourself a wife is the cheerfulest tidings
you could send us.  It is in no wise meet for man to be alone;
and indeed the beneficent Heavens, in creating Eve, did
mercifully guard against that.  May it prove blessed, this new
arrangement!  I delight to prophesy for you peaceful days in it;
peaceful, not idle;  filled rather with that best activity which
is the stillest.  To the future, or perhaps at this hour actual
Mrs. Emerson, will you offer true wishes from two British
Friends;  who have not seen her with their eyes, but whose
thoughts need not be strangers to the Home she will make for you.
Nay, you add the most chivalrous summons:  which who knows but
one day we may actually stir ourselves to obey!  It may hover for
the present among the gentlest of our day-dreams;  mild-lustrous;
an impossible possibility.  May all go well with you, my worthy
Countryman, Kinsman, and brother Man!

This so astonishing reception of Teufelsdrockh in your
New England circle seems to me not only astonishing, but
questionable;  not, however, to be quarreled with.  I may say:
If the New. England cup is dangerously sweet, there are here in
Old England whole antiseptic floods of good _hop_-decoction;
therein let it mingle;  work wholesomely towards what clear
benefit it can.  Your young ones too, as all exaggeration is
transient, and exaggerated love almost itself a blessing, will
get through it without damage.  As for Fraser, however, the idea
of a new Edition is frightful to him;  or rather ludicrous,
unimaginable.  Of him no man has inquired for a _Sartor:_
in his whole wonderful world of Tory Pamphleteers, Conservative
Younger-brothers, Regent-Street Loungers, Crockford Gamblers, Irish
Jesuits, drunken Reporters, and miscellaneous unclean persons
(whom nitre and much soap will not wash clean), not a soul has
expressed the smallest wish that way.  He shrieks at the idea.
Accordingly I realized these four copies from [him,] all he will
surrender;  and can do no more.  Take them with my blessing.  I
beg you will present one to the honorablest of those "honorable
women";  say to her that her (unknown) image as she reads
shall be to me a bright faultless vision, textured out of
mere sunbeams;  to be loved and worshiped;  the best of all
Transatlantic women!  Do at any rate, in a more business like
style, offer my respectful regards to Dr. Channing, whom
certainly I could not count on for a reader, or other than a
grieved condemnatory one;  for I reckoned tolerance had its
limits.  His own faithful, long-continued striving towards what
is Best, I knew and honored;  that he will let me go my own way
thitherward, with a God-speed from him, is surely a new honor to
us both.

Finally, on behalf of the British world (which is not all
contained in Fraser's shop) I should tell you that various
persons, some of them in a dialect not to be doubted of, have
privately expressed their recognition of this poor Rhapsody,
the best the poor Clothes-Professor could produce in the
circumstances;  nay, I have Scottish Presbyterian Elders who
read, and thank.  So true is what you say about the aptitude of
all natural hearts for receiving what is from the heart spoken to
them.  As face answereth to face!  Brother, if thou wish me to
believe, do thou thyself believe first:  this is as true as that
of the _flere_ and _dolendum;_  perhaps truer.  Wherefore,
putting all things together, cannot I feel that I have washed my
hands of this business in a quite tolerable manner?  Let a man be
thankful;  and on the whole go along, while he has strength left
to go.

This Boston _Transcendentalist,_ whatever the fate or merit of it
prove to be, is surely an interesting symptom.  There must be
things not dreamt of, over in that Transoceanic Parish!  I shall
cordially wish well to this thing;  and hail it as the sure
forerunner of things better.  The Visible becomes the Bestial
when it rests not on the Invisible.  Innumerable tumults of
Metaphysic must be struggled through (whole generations perishing
by the way), and at last Transcendentalism evolve itself (if I
construe aright), as the _Euthanasia_ of Metaphysic altogether.
May it be sure, may it be speedy!  Thou shalt open thy _eyes,_ O
Son of Adam;  thou shalt _look,_ and not forever jargon about
_laws_ of Optics and the making of spectacles!  For myself, I
rejoice very much that I seem to be flinging aside innumerable
sets of spectacles (could I but _lay_ them aside,--with
gentleness!) and hope one day actually to see a thing or two.
Man _lives_ by Belief (as it was well written of old);  by logic
he can only at best long to live.  Oh, I am dreadfully, afflicted
with Logic here, and wish often (in my haste) that I had the
besom of destruction to lay to it for a little!

"Why? and WHEREFORE?  God wot, simply THEREFORE!  Ask not WHY;
't is SITH thou hast to care for."

Since I wrote last to you, (which seems some three months ago,)
there has a great mischance befallen me:  the saddest, I think,
of the kind called Accidents I ever had to front.  By dint of
continual endeavor for many weary weeks, I had got the first
volume of that miserable _French Revolution_ rather handsomely
finished:  from amid infinite contradictions I felt as if my head
were fairly above water, and I could go on writing my poor Book,
defying the Devil and the World, with a certain degree of
assurance, and even of joy.  A Friend borrowed this volume of
Manuscript,--a kind Friend but a careless one,--to write notes on
it, which he was well qualified to do.  One evening about two
months ago he came in on us, "distraction (literally) in his
aspect";  the Manuscript, left carelessly out, had been torn up
as waste paper, and all but three or four tatters was clean gone!
I could not complain, or the poor man seemed as if he would have
shot himself:  we had to gather ourselves together, and show a
smooth front to it;  which happily, though difficult, was not
impossible to do.  I began again at the beginning;  to such a
wretched paralyzing torpedo of a task as my hand never found to
do:  at which I have worn myself these two months to the hue of
saffron, to the humor of incipient desperation;  and now, four
days ago, perceiving well that I was like a man swimming in an
element that grew ever rarer, till at last it became vacuum
(think of that!)  I with a new effort of self-denial sealed up
all the paper fragments, and said to myself:  In this mood thou
makest no way, writest _nothing_ that requires not to be erased
again;  lay it by for one complete week!  And so it lies, under
lock and key.  I have digested the whole misery;  I say, if thou
canst _never_ write this thing, why then never do write it:
God's Universe will go along _better_--without it.  My Belief
in a special Providence grows yearly stronger, unsubduable,
impregnable:  however, you see all the mad increase of entanglement
I have got to strive with, and will pity me in it.  Bodily
exhaustion (and "Diana in the shape of bile") I will at least
try to exclude from the controversy.  By God's blessing, perhaps
the Book shall yet be written;  but I find it will not do,
by sheer direct force;  only by gentler side-methods.  I have
much else to write too:  I feel often as if with one year of
health and peace I could write something considerable;--the image
of which sails dim and great through my head.  Which year of
health and peace, God, if He see meet, will give me yet;  or
withhold from me, as shall be for the best.

I have dwelt and swum now for about a year in this World-Maelstrom
of London;  with much pain, which however has given me many
thoughts, more than a counterbalance for that.  Hitherto there
is no outlook, but confusion, darkness, innumerable things
against which a man must "set his face like a flint."  Madness
rules the world, as it has generally done:  one cannot,
unhappily, without loss, say to it, Rule then;  and yet must say
it.--However, in two months more I expect my good Brother from
Italy (a brave fellow, who is a great comfort to me);  we are
then for Scotland to gather a little health, to consider
ourselves a little.  I must have this Book done before anything
else will prosper with me.

Your American Pamphlets got to hand only a few days ago;  worthy
old Rich had them not originally;  seemed since to have been
oblivious, out of Town, perhaps unwell.  I called one day, and
unearthed them.  Those papers you marked I have read.  Genuine
endeavor;  which may the Heavens forward!--In this poor Country
all is swallowed up in the barren Chaos of Politics:  Ministries
tumbled out, Ministries tumbled in;  all things (a fearful
substratum of "Ignorance and Hunger" weltering and heaving under
them) apparently in rapid progress towards--the melting-pot.
There will be news from England by and by:  many things have
reached their term;  Destiny "with lame foot" has overtaken them,
and there will be a reckoning.  O blessed are you where,
what jargoning soever there be at Washington, the poor man
(_un_governed can govern himself) shoulders his age, and walks
into the Western Woods, sure of a nourishing Earth and an
overarching Sky!  It is verily the Door of Hope to distracted
Europe;  which otherwise I should see crumbling down into
blackness of darkness.--That too shall be for good.

I wish I had anything to send you besides these four poor
Pamphlets;  but I fear there is nothing going.  Our Ex-Chancellor
has been promulgating triticalities (significant as novelties,
when _he_ with his wig and lordhood utters them) against the
Aristocracy;  whereat the upper circles are terribly scandalized.
In Literature, except a promised or obtained (but to me still
unknown) volume of Wordsworth, nothing nameworthy doing.--Did I
tell you that I _saw_ Wordsworth this winter?  Twice, at
considerable length;  with almost no disappointment.  He is a
_natural_ man (which means whole immensities here and now);
flows like a natural well yielding mere wholesomeness,--though,
as it would not but seem to me, in _small_ quantity, and
astonishingly _diluted._  Franker utterance of mere garrulities
and even platitudes I never heard from any man;  at least never,
whom I could _honor_ for uttering them.  I am thankful for
Wordsworth;  as in great darkness and perpetual _sky-rockets_ and
_coruscations,_ one were for the smallest clear-burning farthing
candle.  Southey also I saw;  a far _cleverer_ man in speech, yet
a considerably smaller man.  Shovel-hatted;  the shovel-hat is
_grown_ to him:  one must take him as he is.

The second leaf is done;  I must not venture on another.  God
bless you, my worthy Friend;  you and her who is to be yours!  My
Wife bids me send heartiest wishes and regards from her too
across the Sea.  Perhaps we shall all meet one another some day,
--if not Here, then Yonder!

Faithfully always,
T. Carlyle




VIII.  Carlyle to Emerson

Chelsea, London, 27 June, 1835

My Dear Friend,--Your very kind Letter has been in my hand these
four weeks,--the subject of much meditation, which has not yet
cleared itself into anything like a definite practical issue.
Indeed, the conditions of the case are still not wholly before
me:  for if the American side of it, thanks to your perspicuous
minuteness, is now tolerably plain, the European side continues
dubious, too dim for a decision.  So much in my own position here
is vague, not to be measured;  then there is a Brother, coming
home to me from Italy, almost daily expected now;  whose ulterior
resolutions cannot but be influential on mine;  for we are
Brothers in the old good sense, and have one heart and one
interest and object, and even one purse;  and Jack is a _good
man,_ for whom I daily thank Heaven, as for one of its principal
mercies.  He is Traveling Physician to the Countess of Clare,
well entreated by her and hers;  but, I think, weary of that
inane element of "the English Abroad," and as good as determined
to have done with it;  to seek _work_ (he sees not well how), if
possible, with wages;  but even almost _without,_ or with the
lowest endurable, if need be.  Work and wages:  the two prime
necessities of man!  It is pity they should ever be disjoined;
yet of the two, if one _must,_ in this mad Earth, be dispensed
with, it is really wise to say at all hazards, Be it the wages
then.  This Brother (if the Heavens have been kind to me) must be
in Paris one of these days;  then here speedily;  and "the House
must resolve itself into a Committee"--of ways and means.  Add to
all this, that I myself have been and am one of the stupidest of
living men;  in one of my vacant, interlunar conditions, unfit
for deciding on anything:  were I to give you my actual _view_ of
this case, it were a view such as Satan had from the pavilion of
the Anarch old.  Alas! it is all too like Chaos:  confusion of
dense and rare:  I also know what it is to drop _plumb,_
fluttering my pennons vain,--for a series of weeks.

One point only is clear:  that you, my Friend, are very friendly
to me;  that New England is as much my country and home as Old
England.  Very singular and very pleasant it is to me to feel as
if I had a _house of my own_ in that far country:  so many
leagues and geographical degrees of wild-weltering "unfruitful
brine";  and then the hospitable hearth and the smiles of
brethren awaiting one there!  What with railways, steamships,
printing presses, it has surely become a most _monstrous_
"tissue," this life of ours;  if evil and confusion in the one
Hemisphere, then good and order in the other, a man knows not
how:  and so it rustles forth, immeasurable, from "that roaring
Loom of Time,"--miraculous ever as of old!  To Ralph Waldo
Emerson, however, and those that love me as he, be thanks always,
and a sure place in the sanctuary of the mind.  Long shall we
remember that Autumn Sunday that landed him (out of Infinite
Space) on the Craigenputtock wilderness, not to leave us as he
found us.  My Wife says, whatever I decide on, I cannot thank you
too heartily;--which really is very sound doctrine.  I write to
tell you so much;  and that you shall hear from me again when
there is more to tell.

It does seem next to certain to me that I could preach a very
considerable quantity of things from that Boston Pulpit, such as
it is,--were I once fairly started.  If so, what an unspeakable
relief were it too!  Of the whole mountain of miseries one
grumbles at in this life, the central and parent one, as I often
say, is that you cannot utter yourself.  The poor soul sits
struggling, impatient, longing vehemently out towards all corners
of the Universe, and cannot get its hest delivered, not even so
far as the voice might do it.  Imprisoned, enchanted, like the
Arabian Prince with half his body marble:  it is really bad work.
Then comes bodily sickness;  to act and react, and double the
imbroglio.  Till at last, I suppose, one does rise, like Eliphaz
the Temanite;  states that his inner man is bursting (as if
filled with carbonic acid and new wine), that by the favor of
Heaven he will speak a word or two.  Would it were come so far,--
if it be ever to come!

On the whole I think the odds are that I shall some time or other
get over to you;  but that for this winter I ought not to go.  My
London expedition is not decided hitherto;  I have begun various
relations and arrangements, which it were questionable to cut
short so soon.  That beggarly Book, were there nothing else,
hampers me every way.  To fling it once for all into the fire
were perhaps the best;  yet I grudge to do that.  To finish it,
on the other hand, is denied me for the present, or even so much
as to work at it.  What am I to do?  When my Brother arrives, we
go all back to Scotland for some weeks:  there, in seclusion,
with such calmness as I can find or create, the plan for the
winter must be settled.  You shall hear from me then;  let us
hope something more reasonable than I can write at present.  For
about a month I have gone to and fro utterly _idle:_  understand
that, and I need explain no more.  The wearied machine refused to
be urged any farther;  after long spasmodic struggling comes
collapse.  The burning of that wretched Manuscript has really
been a sore business for me.  Nevertheless that too shall clear
itself, and prove a _favor_ of the Upper Powers:  _tomorrow_ to
fresh fields and pastures new!  This monstrous London has taught
me several things during the past year;  for if its Wisdom be of
the most uninstructive ever heard of by that name of wisdom, its
Folly abounds with lessons,--which one ought to learn.  I feel
(with my burnt manuscript) as if defeated in this campaign;
defeated, yet not altogether disgraced.  As the great Fritz said,
when the battle had gone against him, "Another time we will
do better."

As to Literature, Politics, and the whole multiplex aspect of
existence here, expect me not to say one word.  We are a singular
people, in a singular condition.  Not many nights ago, in one of
those phenomenal assemblages named routs, whither we had gone to
see the countenance of O'Connell and Company (the Tail was a
Peacock's tail, with blonde muslin women and heroic Parliamentary
men), one of the company, a "distinguished female" (as we call
them), informed my Wife "O'Connell was the master-spirit of this
age."  If so, then for what we have received let us be thankful,
--and enjoy it _without_ criticism.--It often painfully seems to
me as if much were coming fast to a crisis here;  as if the
crown-wheel had given way, and the whole horologe were rushing
rapidly down, down, to its end!  Wreckage is swift;  rebuilding
is slow and distant.  Happily another than we has charge of it.

My new American Friends have come and gone.  Barnard went off
northward some fortnight ago, furnished with such guidance and
furtherance as I could give him.  Professor Longfellow went about
the same time;  to Sweden, then to Berlin and Germany:  we saw
him twice or thrice, and his ladies, with great pleasure;  as one
sees worthy souls from a far country, who cannot abide with you,
who throw you a kind greeting as they pass.  I inquired
considerably about Concord, and a certain man there;  one of the
fair pilgrims told me several comfortable things.  By the bye,
how very good you are, in regard to this of Unitarianism!  I
declare, I am ashamed of my intolerance:--and yet you have ceased
to be a Teacher of theirs, have you not?  I mean to address you
this time by the secular title of Esquire;  as if I liked you
better so.  But truly, in black clothes or in white, by this
style or by that, the man himself can never be other than welcome
to me.  You will further allow me to fancy that you are now
wedded;  and offer our united congratulations and kindest good
wishes to that new fair Friend of ours, whom one day we shall
surely know more of,--if the Fates smile.

My sheet is ending, and I must not burden you with double postage
for such stuff as this.  By dint of some inquiry I have learnt
the law of the American Letter-carrying;  and I now mention it
for our mutual benefit.  There are from New York to London three
packets monthly (on the 1st, on the 10th, on the 20th);  the
masters of these carry Letters gratis for all men;  and put the
same into the Post-Office;  there are some pence charged on the
score of "Ship-letter" there, and after that, the regular postage
of the country, if the Letter has to go farther.  I put this,
for example, into a place called North and South American
Coffee-house in the City here, and pay twopence for it, and it
flies.  Doubtless there is some similar receiving-house with its
"leather bag" somewhere in New York, and fixed days (probably the
same as our days) for emptying, or rather for tying and despatching,
said leather bag:  if you deal with the London Packets (so long as
I am here) in preference to the Liverpool ones, it will all be
well.  As for the next Letter, (if you write as I hope you may
before hearing from me again,) pray direct it, "Care of John
Mill, Esq., India House, London";  and he will forward it
directly, should I even be still absent in the North.--Now will
you write? and pray write something about yourself.  We both love
you here, and send you all good prayers.  _Vale faveque!_

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle



IX.  Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Please God I will never again sit six weeks of
this short human life over a letter of yours without answering it.

I received in August your letter of June, and just then hearing
that a lady, a little lady with a mighty heart, Mrs. Child, whom
I scarcely know but do much respect, was about to visit England
(invited thither for work's sake by the African or Abolition
Society) and that she begged an introduction to you, I used
the occasion to say the godsend was come, and that I would
acknowledge it as soon as three then impending tasks were ended.
I have now learned that Mrs. Child was detained for weeks in New
York and did not sail. Only last night I received your letter
written in May, with the four copies of the _Sartor,_ which by a
strange oversight have been lying weeks, probably months, in the
Custom-House.  On such provocation I can sit still no longer.

The three tasks were, a literary address;  a historical discourse
on the two-hundredth anniversary of our little town of Concord
(my first adventure in print, which I shall send you);  the
third, my marriage, now happily consummated.  All three, from the
least to the greatest, trod so fast upon each other's heel as to
leave me, who am a slow and awkward workman, no interstice big
enough for a letter that should hope to convey any information.
Again I waited that the Discourse might go in his new jacket to
show how busy I had been, but the creeping country press has not
dressed it yet.  Now congratulate me, my friend, as indeed you
have already done, that I live with my wife in my own house,
waiting on the good future.  The house is not large, but
convenient and very elastic.  The more hearts (specially great
hearts) it holds, the better it looks and feels.  I have not had
so much leisure yet but that the fact of having ample space to
spread my books and blotted paper is still gratifying.  So know
now that your rooms in America wait for you, and that my wife is
making ready a closet for Mrs. Carlyle.

I could cry at the disaster that has befallen you in the loss of
the book.  My brother Charles says the only thing the friend
could do on such an occasion was to shoot himself, and wishes to
know if he have done so.  Such mischance might well quicken one's
curiosity to know what Oversight there is of us, and I greet you
well upon your faith and the resolution issuing out of it.  You
have certainly found a right manly consolation, and can afford to
faint and rest a month or two on the laurels of such endeavor.  I
trust ere this you have re-collected the entire creation out of
the secret cells where, under the smiles of every Muse, it first
took life.  Believe, when you are weary, that you who stimulate
and rejoice virtuous young men do not write a line in vain.  And
whatever betide us in the inexorable future, what is better than
to have awaked in many men the sweet sense of beauty, and to
double the courage of virtue.  So do not, as you will not, let
the imps from all the fens of weariness and apathy have a minute
too much.  To die of feeding the fires of others were sweet,
since it were not death but multiplication.  And yet I hold to a
more orthodox immortality too.

This morning in happiest time I have a letter from George Ripley,
who tells me you have written him, and that you say pretty
confidently you will come next summer.  _Io paean!_  He tells me
also that Alexander Everett (brother of Edward) has sent you the
friendly notice that has just appeared in the _North American
Review,_ with a letter.  All which I hope you have received.  I
am delighted, for this man represents a clique to which I am a
stranger, and which I supposed might not love you.  It must be
you shall succeed when Saul prophesies.  Indeed, I have heard
that you may hear the _Sartor_ preached from some of our best
pulpits and lecture-rooms.  Don't think I speak of myself, for I
cherish carefully a salutary horror at the German style, and hold
off my admiration as long as ever I can.  But all my importance
is quite at an end.  For now that Doctors of Divinity and the
solemn Review itself have broke silence to praise you, I have
quite lost my plume as your harbinger.

I read with interest what you say of the political omens in
England.  I could wish our country a better comprehension of its
felicity.  But government has come to be a trade, and is managed
solely on commercial principles.  A man plunges into politics to
make his fortune, and only cares that the world should last his
day.  We have had in different parts of the country mobs and
moblike legislation, and even moblike judicature, which have
betrayed an almost godless state of society;  so that I begin to
think even here it behoves every man to quit his dependency on
society as much as he can, as he would learn to go without
crutches that will be soon plucked away from him, and settle with
himself the principles he can stand upon, happen what may.  There
is reading, and public lecturing too, in this country, that I
could recommend as medicine to any gentleman who finds the love
of life too strong in him.

If virtue and friendship have not yet become fables, do believe
we keep your face for the living type.  I was very glad to hear
of the brother you describe, for I have one too, and know what it
is to have presence in two places.  Charles Chauncy Emerson is a
lawyer now settled in this town, and, as I believe, no better
Lord Hamlet was ever.  He is our Doctor on all questions of
taste, manners, or action.  And one of the pure pleasures I
promise myself in the months to come is to make you two gentlemen
know each other.




X.  Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I am concerned at not hearing from you.  I have
written you two letters, one in October, one in November, I
believe, since I had any tidings of you.  Your last letter is
dated 27 June, 1835.  I have counted all the chances of delay and
miscarriage, and still am anxious lest you are ill, or have
forgotten us.  I have looked at the advertising sheet of the
booksellers, but it promised nothing of the _History._  I thought
I had made the happiest truce with sorrow in having the promise
of your coming,--I was to take possession of a new kingdom of
virtue and friendship.  Let not the new wine mourn.  Speak to me
out of the wide silence.  Many friends inquire of me concerning
you, and you must write some word immediately on receipt of
this sheet.

With it goes an American reprint of the _Sartor._  Five hundred
copies only make the edition, at one dollar a copy.  About one
hundred and fifty copies are subscribed for.  How it will be
received I know not.  I am not very sanguine, for I often hear
and read somewhat concerning its repulsive style.  Certainly, I
tell them, it is very odd.  Yet I read a chapter lately with
great pleasure.  I send you also, with Dr. Channing's regards and
good wishes, a copy of his little work, lately published, on our
great local question of Slavery.

You must have written me since July.  I have reckoned upon
your projected visit the ensuing summer or autumn, and have
conjectured the starlike influences of a new spiritual element.
Especially Lectures.  My own experiments for one or two winters,
and the readiness with which you embrace the work, have led me to
think much and to expect much from this mode of addressing men.
In New England the Lyceum, as we call it, is already a great
institution.  Beside the more elaborate courses of lectures in
the cities, every country town has its weekly evening meeting,
called a Lyceum, and every professional man in the place is
called upon, in the course of the winter, to entertain his
fellow-citizens with a discourse on whatever topic.  The topics
are miscellaneous as heart can wish.  But in Boston, Lowell,
Salem, courses are given by individuals.  I see not why this is
not the most flexible of all organs of opinion, from its
popularity and from its newness permitting you to say what you
think, without any shackles of prescription.  The pulpit in our
age certainly gives forth an obstructed and uncertain sound, and
the faith of those in it, if men of genius, may differ so much
from that of those under it, as to embarrass the conscience of
the speaker, because so much is attributed to him from the fact
of standing there.  In the Lyceum nothing is presupposed.  The
orator is only responsible for what his lips articulate.  Then
what scope it allows!  You may handle every member and relation
of humanity.  What could Homer, Socrates, or St. Paul say that
cannot be said here?  The audience is of all classes, and its
character will be determined always by the name of the lecturer.
Why may you not give the reins to your wit, your pathos, your
philosophy, and become that good despot which the virtuous
orator is?

Another thing.  I am persuaded that, if a man speak well, he
shall find this a well-rewarded work in New England.  I have
written this year ten lectures;  I had written as many last year.
And for reading both these and those at places whither I was
invited, I have received this last winter about three hundred and
fifty dollars.  Had I, in lieu of receiving a lecturer's fee,
myself advertised that I would deliver these in certain places,
these receipts would have been greatly increased.  I insert all
this because my prayers for you in this country are quite of a
commercial spirit.  If you lose no dollar by us, I shall joyfully
trust your genius and virtue for your satisfaction on all
other points.

I cannot remember that there are any other mouthpieces that are
specially vital at this time except Criticism and Parliamentary
Debate.  I think this of ours would possess in the hands of a
great genius great advantages over both.  But what avail any
commendations of the form, until I know that the man is alive and
well?  If you love them that love you, write me straightway of
your welfare.  My wife desires to add to mine her friendliest
greetings to Mrs. Carlyle and to yourself.

Yours affectionately,
R. Waldo Emerson

I ought to say that Le-Baron Russell, a worthy young man
who studies Engineering, did cause the republication of
Teufelsdrockh.  I trust you shall yet see a better American
review of it than the _North American._



XI. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Barnard is returning across the water, and must
not go back without a flying salutation for you.  These many
weeks I have had your letter by me;  these many weeks I have felt
always that it deserved and demanded a grateful answer;  and,
alas! also that I could give it none.  It is impossible for you
to figure what mood I am in.  One sole thought, That Book! that
weary Book! occupies me continually:  wreck and confusion of all
kinds go tumbling and falling around me, within me;  but to wreck
and growth, to confusion and order, to the world at large, I turn
a deaf ear;  and have life only for this one thing,--which also
in general I feel to be one of the pitifulest that ever man went
about possessed with.  Have compassion for me!  It is really very
miserable:  but it will end.  Some months more, and it is
_ended;_  and I am done with _French Revolution,_ and with
Revolution and Revolt in general;  and look once more with
free eyes over this Earth, where are other things than mean
internecine work of that kind:  things fitter for me, under the
bright Sun, on this green Mother's-bosom (though the Devil does
dwell in it)!  For the present, really, it is like a Nessus'
shirt, burning you into madness, this wretched Enterprise;  nay,
it is also like a kind of Panoply, rendering you invulnerable,
insensible, to all _other_ mischiefs.

I got the fatal First Volume finished (in the miserablest way,
after great efforts) in October last;  my head was all in a
whirl;  I fled to Scotland and my Mother for a month of rest.
Rest is nowhere for the Son of Adam:  all looked so "spectral" to
me in my old-familiar Birthland;  Hades itself could not have
seemed stranger;  Annandale also was part of the kingdom of TIME.
Since November I have worked again as I could;  a second volume
got wrapped up and sealed out of my sight within the last three
days.  There is but a Third now:  one pull more, and then!  It
seems to me, I will fly into some obscurest cranny of the world,
and lie silent there for a twelvemonth.  The mind is weary, the
body is very sick;  a little black speck dances to and fro in the
left eye (part of the retina protesting against the liver, and
striking work):  I cannot help it;  it must flutter and dance
there, like a signal of distress, unanswered till I be done.  My
familiar friends tell me farther that the Book is all wrong,
style cramp, &c., &c.:  my friends, I answer, you are very right;
but this also, Heaven be my witness, I cannot help.--In such sort
do I live here;  all this I had to write you, if I wrote at all.

For the rest I cannot say that this huge blind monster of a City
is without some sort of charm for me.  It leaves one alone, to go
his own road unmolested.  Deep in your soul you take up your
protest against it, defy it, and even despise it;  but need not
divide yourself from it for that.  Worthy individuals are glad to
hear your thought, if it have any sincerity;  they do not
exasperate themselves or you about it;  they have not even time
for such a thing.  Nay, in stupidity itself on a scale of this
magnitude, there is an impressiveness, almost a sublimity;  one
thinks how, in the words of Schiller, "the very Gods fight
against it in vain";  how it lies on its unfathomable foundations
there, inert yet peptic;  nay, eupeptic;  and is a _Fact_ in the
world, let theory object as it will.  Brown-stout, in quantities
that would float a seventy-four, goes down the throats of men;
and the roaring flood of life pours on;--over which Philosophy
and Theory are but a poor shriek of remonstrance, which oftenest
were wiser, perhaps, to hold its peace.  I grow daily to honor
Facts more and more, and Theory less and less.  A Fact, it seems
to me, is a great thing:  a Sentence printed if not by God, then
at least by the Devil;--neither Jeremy Bentham nor Lytton Bulwer
had a hand in _that._

There are two or three of the best souls here I have known for
long:  I feel less alone with them;  and yet one is alone,--a
stranger and a pilgrim.  These friends expect mainly that the
Church of England is not dead but asleep;  that the leather
coaches, with their gilt panels, can be peopled again with a
living Aristocracy, instead of the simulacra of such.  I must
altogether hold my peace to this, as I do to much.  Coleridge is
the Father of all these.  _Ay de mi!_

But to look across the "divine salt-sea."  A letter reached me,
some two months ago, from Mobile, Alabama;  the writer, a kind
friend of mine, signs himself James Freeman Clarke. I have
mislaid, not lost his Letter;  and do not at present know his
permanent address (for he seemed to be only on a visit at
Mobile);  but you, doubtless, do know it.  Will you therefore
take or even find an opportunity to tell this good Friend that it
is not the wreckage of the Liverpool ship he wrote by, nor
insensibility on my part, that prevents his hearing direct from
me;  that I see him, and love him in this Letter;  and hope we
shall meet one day under the Sun, shall live under it, at any
rate, with many a kind thought towards one another.

The _North American Review_ you spoke of never came (I mean that
copy of it with the Note in it);  but another copy became rather
public here, to the amusement of some.  I read the article
myself:  surely this Reviewer, who does not want in [sense]
otherwise, is an original:  either a _thrice_-plied quiz
(_Sartor's_  "Editor" a twice-plied one);  or else opening on you
a grandeur of still Dulness, rarely to be met with on earth.

My friend!  I must end here.  Forgive me till I get done with
this Book.  Can you have the generosity to write, _without_ an
answer?  Well, if you can_not,_ I will answer.  Do not forget me.
My love and my Wife's to your good Lady, to your Brother, and all
friends.  Tell me what you do;  what your world does.  As for my
world, take this (which I rendered from the German Voss, a tough
old-Teutonic fellow) for the best I can say of it:--

     "As journeys this Earth, her eye on a Sun, through the
heavenly spaces,
     And, radiant in azure, or Sunless, swallowed in tempests,
     Falters not, alters not;  journeying equal, sunlit or
stormgirt
     So thou, Son of Earth, who hast Force,
     Goal, and Time, go still onwards."

Adieu, my dear friend!  Believe me ever Yours,
Thomas Carlyle




XII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I hope you do not measure my love by the
tardiness of my messages.  I have few pleasures like that of
receiving your kind and eloquent letters.  I should be most
impatient of the long interval between one and another, but that
they savor always of Eternity, and promise me a friendship and
friendly inspiration not reckoned or ended by days or years.
Your last letter, dated in April, found me a mourner, as did your
first.  I have lost out of this world my brother Charles, of
whom I have spoken to you,--the friend and companion of many
years, the inmate of my house, a man of a beautiful genius, born
to speak well, and whose conversation for these last years has
treated every grave question of humanity, and has been my daily
bread.  I have put so much dependence on his gifts that we made
but one man together;  for I needed never to do what he could do
by noble nature much better than I.  He was to have been married
in this month, and at the time of his sickness and sudden
death I was adding apartments to my house for his permanent
accommodation.  I wish that you could have known him.  At
twenty-seven years the best life is only preparation.  He built
his foundation so large that it needed the full age of man to make
evident the plan and proportions of his character.  He postponed
always a particular to a final and absolute success, so that his
life was a silent appeal to the great and generous.  But some
time I shall see you and speak of him.

We want but two or three friends, but these we cannot do without,
and they serve us in every thought we think.  I find now I must
hold faster the remaining jewels of my social belt.  And of you I
think much and anxiously since Mrs. Channing, amidst her delight
at what she calls the happiest hour of her absence, in her
acquaintance with you and your family, expresses much uneasiness
respecting your untempered devotion to study.  I am the more
disturbed by her fears, because your letters avow a self-devotion
to your work, and I know there is no gentle dulness in your
temperament to counteract the mischief.  I fear Nature has not
inlaid fat earth enough into your texture to keep the ethereal
blade from whetting it through.  I write to implore you to be
careful of your health.  You are the property of all whom you
rejoice in art and soul, and you must not deal with your body as
your own.  O my friend, if you would come here and let me nurse
you and pasture you in my nook of this long continent, I will
thank God and you therefor morning and evening, and doubt not to
give you, in a quarter of a year, sound eyes, round cheeks, and
joyful spirits.  My wife has been lately an invalid, but she
loves you thoroughly, and hardly stores a barrel of flour or lays
her new carpet without some hopeful reference to Mrs. Carlyle.
And in good earnest, why cannot you come here forthwith, and
deliver in lectures to the solid men of Boston the _History of
the French Revolution_ before it is published,--or at least
whilst it is publishing in England, and before it is published
here.  There is no doubt of the perfect success of such a course
now that the _five hundred copies of the Sartor are all sold,_
and read with great delight by many persons.

This I suggest if you too must feel the vulgar necessity of
_doing;_  but if you will be governed by your friend, you shall
come into the meadows, and rest and talk with your friend in my
country pasture.  If you will come here like a noble brother, you
shall have your solid day undisturbed, except at the hours of
eating and walking;  and as I will abstain from you myself,
so I will defend you from others.  I entreat Mrs. Carlyle,
with my affectionate remembrances, to second me in this
proposition, and not suffer the wayward man to think that in
these space-destroying days a prayer from Boston, Massachusetts,
is any less worthy of serious and prompt granting than one
from Edinburgh or Oxford.

I send you a little book I have just now published, as
an entering wedge, I hope, for something more worthy and
significant.  This is only a naming of topics on which I would
gladly speak and gladlier hear.  I am mortified to learn the ill
fate of my former packet containing the _Sartor_ and Dr.
Channing's work.  My mercantile friend is vexed, for he says
accurate orders were given to send it as a packet, not as a
letter.  I shall endeavor before despatching this sheet to obtain
another copy of our American edition.

I wish I could come to you instead of sending this sheet of
paper.  I think I should persuade you to get into a ship this
Autumn, quit all study for a time, and follow the setting sun.  I
have many, many things to learn of you.  How melancholy to think
how much we need confession!...  Yet the great truths are always
at hand, and all the tragedy of individual life is separated how
thinly from that universal nature which obliterates all ranks,
all evils, all individualities.  How little of you is in your
_will!_  Above your will how intimately are you related to all of
us!  In God we meet.  Therein we _are,_ thence we descend upon
Time and these infinitesimal facts of Christendom, and Trade, and
England Old and New.  Wake the soul now drunk with a sleep, and
we overleap at a bound the obstructions, the griefs, the
mistakes, of years, and the air we breathe is so vital that the
Past serves to contribute nothing to the result.

I read Goethe, and now lately the posthumous volumes, with a
great interest.  A friend of mine who studies his life with care
would gladly know what records there are of his first ten years
after his settlement at Weimar, and what Books there are in
Germany about him beside what Mrs. Austin has collected and
Heine.  Can you tell me?

Write me of your health, or else come.

Yours ever,
R.W. Emerson.

P.S.--I learn that an acquaintance is going to England, so send
the packet by him.




XIII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Friend,--You are very good to write to me in my silence,
in the mood you must be in.  My silence you may well judge is not
forgetfulness;  it is a forced silence;  which this kind Letter
enforces into words.  I write the day after your letter comes,
lest the morrow bring forth something new to hinder me.

What a bereavement, my Friend, is this that has overtaken you!
Such a Brother, with such a Life opening around him, like a
blooming garden where he was to labor and gather, all vanished
suddenly like frostwork, and hidden from your eye!  It is a loss,
a sore loss;  which God had appointed you.  I do not tell you not
to mourn:  I mourn with you, and could wish all mourners the
spirit you have in this sorrow.  Oh, I know it well!  Often
enough in this noisy Inanity of a vision where _we_ still linger,
I say to myself, Perhaps thy Buried Ones are not far from thee,
are with thee;  they are in Eternity, which is a Now and HERE!
And yet Nature will have her right;  Memory would feel desecrated
if she could forget.  Many times in the crowded din of the
Living, some sight, some feature of a face, will recall to you
the Loved Face;  and in these turmoiling streets you see the
little silent Churchyard, the green grave that lies there so
silent, inexpressibly _wae._  O, perhaps we _shall_ all meet
YONDER, and the tears be wiped from all eyes!  One thing is no
Perhaps:  surely we _shall_ all meet, if it be the will of the
Maker of us.  If it be not His will,--then is it not better so?
Silence,--since in these days we have no speech!  Eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard, in any day.

You inquire so earnestly about my welfare;  hold open still the
hospitable door for me.  Truly Concord, which I have sought out
on the Map, seems worthy of its name:  no dissonance comes to me
from that side;  but grief itself has acquired a harmony:  in joy
or grief a voice says to me, Behold there is one that loves thee;
in thy loneliness, in thy darkness, see how a hospitable candle
shines from far over seas, how a friendly heart watches!  It is
very good, and precious for me.

As for my health, be under no apprehension.  I am always sick;  I
am sicker and worse in body and mind, a little, for the present;
but it has no deep significance:  it is _weariness_ merely;  and
now, by the bounty of Heaven, I am as it were within sight
of land.  In two months more, this unblessed Book will be
_finished;_  at Newyearday we begin printing:  before the end of
March, the thing is out;  and I am a free man!  Few happinesses I
have ever known will equal that, as it seems to me.  And yet I
ought not to call the poor Book unblessed:  no, it has girdled me
round like a panoply these two years;  kept me invulnerable,
indifferent, to innumerable things.  The poorest man in London
has perhaps been one of the freest:  the roaring press of gigs
and gigmen, with their gold blazonry and fierce gig-wheels, have
little incommoded him;  they going their way, he going his.--As
for the results of the Book, I can rationally promise myself, on
the economical, pecuniary, or otherwise worldly side, simply
_zero._  It is a Book contradicting all rules of Formalism, that
have not a Reality within them, which so few have;--testifying,
the more quietly the worse, internecine war with Quacks high and
low.  My good Brother, who was with me out of Italy in summer,
declared himself shocked, and almost terror-struck:  "Jack," I
answered, "innumerable men give their lives cheerfully to defend
Falsehoods and Half-Falsehoods;  why should not one writer give
his life cheerfully to say, in plain Scotch-English, in the
hearing of God and man, To me they seem false and half-false?  At
all events, thou seest, I cannot help it.  It is the nature of
the beast."  So that, on the whole, I suppose there is no more
unpromotable, unappointable man now living in England than I.
Literature also, the miscellaneous place of refuge, seems done
here, unless you will take the Devil's wages for it;  which one
does not incline to do.  A _disjectum membrum;_  cut off from
relations with men?  Verily so;  and now forty years of age;  and
extremely dyspeptical:  a hopeless-looking man.  Yet full of what
I call desperate-hope!  One does verily stand on the Earth, a
Star-dome encompassing one;  seemingly accoutred and enlisted and
sent to battle, with rations good, indifferent, or bad,--what can
one do but in the name of Odin, Tuisco, Hertha, Horsa, and
all Saxon and Hebrew Gods, fight it out?--This surely is very
idle talk.

As to the Book, I do say seriously that it is a wild, savage,
ruleless, very bad Book;  which even you will not be able to
like;  much less any other man.  Yet it contains strange things;
sincerities drawn out of the heart of a man very strangely
situated;  reverent of nothing but what is reverable in all ages
and places:  so we will print it, and be done with it;--and try a
new turn next time.  What I am to do, were the thing done, you
see therefore, is most uncertain.  How gladly would I run to
Concord!  And if I were there, be sure the do-nothing arrangement
is the only conceivable one for me.  That my sick existence
subside again, this is the first condition; that quiet vision be
restored me.  It is frightful what an impatience I have got for
many kinds of fellow-creatures.  Their jargon really hurts me
like the shrieking of inarticulate creatures that ought to
articulate.  There is no resource but to say:  Brother, thou
surely art not hateful;  thou art lovable, at lowest pitiable;--
alas! in my case, thou art dreadfully wearisome, unedifying:  go
thy ways, with my blessing.  There are hardly three people among
these two millions, whom I care much to exchange words with, in
the humor I have.  Nevertheless, at bottom, it is not my purpose
to quit London finally till I have as it were _seen it out._  In
the very hugeness of the monstrous City, contradiction cancelling
contradiction, one finds a sort of composure for one's self that
is not to be met with elsewhere perhaps in the world:  people
tolerate you, were it only that they have not time to trouble
themselves with you.  Some individuals even love me here;  there
are one or two whom I have even learned to love,--though, for the
present, cross circumstances have snatched them out of my orbit
again mostly.  Wherefore, if you ask me, What I am to do?--the
answer is clear so far, "Rest myself awhile";  and all farther is
as dark as Chaos.  Now for resting, taking that by itself, my
Brother, who has gone back to Rome with some thoughts of settling
as a Physician there, presses me to come thither, and rest in
Rome.  On the other hand, a certain John Sterling (the best man I
have found in these regions) has been driven to Bordeaux lately
for his health;  he will have it that I must come to him, and
walk through the South of France to Dauphine, Avignon, and over
the Alps next spring!  Thirdly, my Mother will have me return to
Annandale, and lie quiet in her little habitation;--which I
incline to think were the wisest course of all.  And lastly from
over the Atlantic comes my good Emerson's voice.  We will settle
nothing, except that all shall remain unsettled.  _Die Zukunft
decket Schmerzen and Glucke._

I ought to say, however, that about New-year's-day I will send
you an Article on _Mirabeau,_ which they have printed here (for a
thing called the _London Review_), and some kind of Note to
escort it.  I think Pamphlets travel as Letters in New England,
provided you leave the ends of them open:  if I be mistaken, pray
instruct Messrs. Barnard to _refuse_ the thing, for it has small
value.  _The Diamond Necklace_ is to be printed also, in
_Fraser;_  inconceivable hawking that poor Paper has had;  till
now Fraser takes it--for L50:  not being able to get it for
nothing.  The _Mirabeau_ was written at the passionate request of
John Mill;  and likewise for needful lucre.  I think it is the
first shilling of money I have earned by my craft these four
years:  where the money I have lived on has come from while I sat
here scribbling gratis, amazes me to think;  yet surely it has
come (for I am still here), and Heaven only to thank for it,
which is a great fact.  As for Mill's _London Review_ (for he is
quasi-editor), I do not recommend it to you.  Hide-bound
Radicalism;  a to me well-nigh insupportable thing!  Open it not:
a breath as of Sahara and the Infinite Sterile comes from every
page of it.  A young Radical Baronet has laid out L3,000 on
getting the world instructed in that manner:  it is very curious
to see.--Alas! the bottom of the sheet!  Take my hurried but
kindest thanks for the prospect of your second Teufelsdrockh:
the _first_ too is now in my possession;  Brother John went to
the Post-Office, and worked it out for a ten shillings.  It is
a beautiful little Book;  and a Preface to it such as no kindest
friend could have improved.  Thank my kind Editor very heartily
from me.

My wife was in Scotland in summer, driven thither by ill health;
she is stronger since her return, though not yet strong;  she
sends over to Concord her kindest wishes.  If I fly to the Alps
or the Ocean, her Mother and she must keep one another company,
we think, till there be better news of me.  You are to thank Dr.
Channing also for his valued gift.  I read the Discourse, and
other friends of his read it, with great estimation;  but the
_end_ of that black question lies beyond my ken.  I suppose, as
usual, Might and Right will have to make themselves synonymous in
some way.  CANST and SHALT, if they are _very_ well understood,
mean the same thing under this Sun of ours.  Adieu, my dear
Emerson.  _Gehab' Dich wohl!_  Many affectionate regards to the
Lady Wife:  it is far within the verge of Probabilities that I
shall see her face, and eat of her bread, one day.  But she must
not get sick!  It is a dreadful thing, sickness;  really a thing
which I begin frequently to think _criminal_--at least in myself.
Nay, in myself it really is criminal;  wherefore I determine to
be well one day.

Good be with you and Yours.
                      T. Carlyle

As to Goethe and your Friend:  I know not anything out of
Goethe's own works (which have many notices in them) that treats
specially of those ten years.  Doubtless your Friend knows
Jordens's _Lexicon_ (which dates all the writings, for one
thing), the _Conversations-Lexicon Supplement,_ and such like.
There is an essay by one Schubarth which has reputation;  but it
is critical and ethical mainly.  The Letters to Zelter, and the
Letters to Schiller, will do nothing for those years, but
are essential to see.  Perhaps in some late number of the
_Zeitgenossen_ there may be something?  Blackguard Heine is worth
very little;  Mentzel is duller, decenter, not much wiser.  A
very curious Book is Eckermann's _Conversations with Goethe,_
just published.  No room more!




XIV. Carlyle to Emerson



My Dear Emerson,--You had promise of a letter to be despatched
you about New-year's-day;  which promise I was myself in a
condition to fulfil at the time set, but delayed it, owing to
delays of printers and certain "Articles" that were to go with
it.  Six weeks have not yet entirely brought up these laggard
animals:  however, I will delay no longer for them.  Nay, it
seems the Articles, were they never so ready, cannot go with the
Letter;  but must fare round by Liverpool or Portsmouth, in a
separate conveyance.  We will leave them to the bounty of Time.

Your little Book and the Copy of _Teufelsdrockh_ came safely;
soon after I had written.  The _Teufelsdrockh_ I instantaneously
despatched to Hamburg, to a Scottish merchant there, to whom
there is an allusion in the Book;  who used to be my _Speditor_
(one of the politest extant though totally a stranger) in my
missions and packages to and from Weimar.  The other, former
Copy, more specially yours, had already been, as I think I told
you, delivered out of durance;  and got itself placed in the
bookshelf, as _the_ Teufelsdrockh.  George Ripley tells me you
are printing another edition;  much good may it do you!  There is
now also a kind of whisper and whimper rising _here_ about
printing one.  I said to myself once, when Bookseller Fraser
shrieked so loud at a certain message you sent him:  "Perhaps
after all they will print this poor rag of a thing into a Book,
after I am dead it may be,--if so seem good to them.  _Either_
way!"  As it is, we leave the poor orphan to its destiny, all the
more cheerfully.  Ripley says farther he has sent me a critique
of it by a better hand than the _North American:_  I expect it,
but have not got it Yet.  The _North American_ seems to say
that he too sent me one.  It never came to hand, nor any hint of
it,--except I think once before through you.  It was not at all
an unfriendly review;  but had an opacity, of matter-of-fact in
it that filled one with amazement.  Since the Irish Bishop who
said there were some things in _Gulliver_ on which he for one
would keep his belief _suspended,_ nothing equal to it, on that
side, has come athwart me.  However, he _has_ made out that
Teufelsdrockh is, in all human probability, a fictitious
character;  which is always something, for an Inquirer into
Truth.--Will you, finally, thank Friend Ripley in my name, till I
have time to write to him and thank him.

Your little azure-colored Nature gave me true satisfaction.  I
read it, and then lent it about to all my acquaintance that had a
sense for such things;  from whom a similar verdict always came
back.  You say it is the first chapter of something greater.  I
call it rather the Foundation and Ground-plan on which you may
build whatsoever of great and true has been given you to build.
It is the true Apocalypse, this when the "Open Secret" becomes
revealed to a man.  I rejoice much in the glad serenity of soul
with which you look out on this wondrous Dwelling-place of yours
and mine--with an ear for the _Ewigen Melodien,_ which pipe in
the winds round us, and utter themselves forth in all sounds and
sights and things:  not to be written down by gamut-machinery;
but which all right writing is a kind of attempt to write down.
You will see what the years will bring you.  It is not one of
your smallest qualities in my mind, that you can wait so quietly
and let the years do their best.  He that cannot keep himself
quiet is of a morbid nature;  and the thing he yields us will be
like him in that, whatever else it be.

Miss Martineau (for I have seen her since I wrote) tells me you
"are the only man in America" who has quietly set himself down on
a competency to follow his own path, and do the work his own will
prescribes for him.  Pity that you were the only one!  But be
one, nevertheless;  be the first, and there will come a second
and a third.  It is a poor country where all men are _sold_ to
Mammon, and can make nothing but Railways and Bursts of
Parliamentary Eloquence!  And yet your New England here too has
the upper hand of our Old England, of our Old Europe:  we too are
sold to Mammon, soul, body, and spirit;  but (mark that, I pray
you, with double pity) Mammon will not _pay_ us,--we, are "Two
Million three hundred thousand in Ireland that have not potatoes
enough"!  I declare, in History I find nothing more tragical.  I
find also that it will alter;  that for me as one it has altered.
Me Mammon will _pay_ or not as he finds convenient;  buy me he
will not.--In fine, I say, sit still at Concord, with such spirit
as you are of;  under the blessed skyey influences, with an open
sense, with the great Book of Existence open round you:  we shall
see whether you too get not something blessed to read us from it.

The Paper is declining fast, and all is yet speculation.  Along
with these two "Articles" (to be sent by Liverpool;  there are
two of them, _Diamond Necklace_ and _Mirabeau_), you will very
probably get some stray Proofsheet--of the unutterable _French
Revolution!_  It is actually at Press;  two Printers working at
separate Volumes of it,--though still too slow.  In not many
weeks, my hands will be washed of it!  You, I hope, can have
little conception of the feeling with which I wrote the last word
of it, one night in early January, when the clock was striking
ten, and our frugal Scotch supper coming in!  I did not cry;  nor
I did not pray but could have done both.  No such _spell_ shall
get itself fixed on me for some while to come!  A beggarly
Distortion;  that will please no mortal, not even myself;  of
which I know not whether the fire were not after all the due
place!  And yet I ought not to say so:  there is a great blessing
in a man's doing what he utterly can, in the case he is in.
Perhaps great quantities of dross are burnt out of me by this
calcination I have had;  perhaps I shall be far quieter and
healthier of mind and body than I have ever been since boyhood.
The world, though no man had ever less empire in it, seems to me
a thing lying _under_ my feet;  a mean imbroglio, which I never
more shall fear, or court, or disturb myself with:  welcome and
welcome to go wholly _its own way;_  I wholly clear for going
mine.  Through the summer months I am, somewhere or other, to
rest myself, in the deepest possible sleep.  The residue is vague
as the wind,--unheeded as the wind.  Some way it will turn out
that a poor, well-meaning Son of Adam has bread growing for him
too, better or worse:  _any_ way,--or even _no_ way, if that be
it,--I shall be content.  There is a scheme here among Friends
for my Lecturing in a thing they call Royal Institution;  but it
will not do there, I think.  The instant two or three are
gathered together under any terms, who want to learn something I
can teach them,--then we will, most readily, as Burns says,
"loose our tinkler jaw";  but not I think till then;  were the
Institution even Imperial.

America has faded considerably into the background of late:
indeed, to say truth, whenever I think of myself in America, it
is as in the Backwoods, with a rifle in my hand, God's sky over
my head, and this accursed Lazar-house of quacks and blockheads,
'and sin and misery (now near a head) lying all behind me
forevermore.  A thing, you see, which is and can be at bottom but
a daydream!  To rest through the summer:  that is my only fixed
wisdom;  a resolution taken;  only the place where uncertain.--
What a pity this poor sheet is done!  I had innumerable things to
tell you about people whom I have seen, about books,--Miss
Harriet Martineau, Mrs. Butler, Southey, Influenza, Parliament,
Literature and the Life of Man,--the whole of which must lie over
till next time.  Write to me;  do not forget me.  My Wife, who is
sitting by me, in very poor health (this long while), sends
"kindest remembrances," "compliments" she expressly does not
send.  Good be with you always, my dear Friend!

                            --T. Carlyle

We send our felicitation to the Mother and little Boy;  which
latter you had better tell us the name of.




XV. Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, Mass., 31 March, 1837

My Dear Friend,--Last night, I said I would write to you
forthwith.  This morning I received your letter of February 13th,
and _with it_ the _Diamond Necklace,_ the _Mirabeau,_ and the
olive leaf of a proof-sheet.  I write out the sum of my debt as
the best acknowledgment I can make.  I had already received,
about New-Year's-Day, the preceding letter.  It came in the midst
of my washbowl-storm of a course of Lectures on the Philosophy of
History.  For all these gifts and pledges,--thanks.  Over the
finished _History,_ joy and evergreen laurels.  I embrace you
with all my heart.  I solace myself with the noble nature God has
given you, and in you to me, and to all.  I had read the _Diamond
Necklace_ three weeks ago at the Boston Athenaeum, and the
_Mirabeau_ I had just read when my copy came.  But the proof-sheet
was virgin gold.  The _Mirabeau_ I forebode is to establish your
kingdom in England.  That is genuine thunder, which nobody that
wears ears can affect to mistake for the rumbling of cart-wheels.
I please myself with thinking that my Angelo has blocked
a Colossus which may stand in the public square to defy all
competitors.  To be sure, that is its least merit,--that nobody
can do the like,--yet is it a gag to Cerberus.  Its better merit
is that it inspires self-trust, by teaching the immense resources
that are in human nature;  so I sent it to be read by a brave man
who is poor and decried.  The doctrine is indeed true and grand
which you preach as by cannonade, that God made a man, and it
were as well to stand by and see what is in him, and, if he act
ever from his impulses, believe that he has his own checks, and,
however extravagant, will keep his orbit, and return from far;  a
faith that draws confirmation from the sempiternal ignorance and
stationariness of society, and the sempiternal growth of all
the individuals.

The _Diamond Necklace_ I read with joy, whilst I read with my own
eyes.  When I read with English or New-English eyes, my joy is
marred by the roaring of the opposition.  I doubt not the exact
story is there told as it fell out, and told for the first time;
but the eye of your readers, as you will easily guess, will be
bewildered by the multitude of brilliant-colored hieroglyphics
whereby the meaning is conveyed.  And for the Gig,--the Gig,--it
is fairly worn out, and such a cloud-compeller must mock that
particular symbol no more.

I thought as I read this piece that your strange genius was the
instant fruit of your London.  It is the aroma of Babylon.  Such
as the great metropolis, such is this style:  so vast, enormous,
related to all the world, and so endless in details.  I think you
see as pictures every street, church, parliament-house, barrack,
baker's shop, mutton-stall, forge, wharf, and ship, and whatever
stands, creeps, rolls, or swims thereabouts, and make all your
own.  Hence your encyclopediacal allusion to all knowables, and
the virtues and vices of your panoramic pages.  Well, it is your
own;  and it is English;  and every word stands for somewhat;
and it cheers and fortifies me.  And what more can a man ask of
his writing fellow-man?  Why, all things;  inasmuch as a good
mind creates wants at every stroke.

The proof-sheet rhymes well with _Mirabeau,_ and has abated my
fears from your own and your brother's account of the new book.
I greet it well.  Auspicious Babe, be born!  The first good of
the book is that it makes you free, and as I anxiously hope makes
your body sound.  A possible good is that it will cause me to see
your face.  But I seemed to read in _Mirabeau_ what you intimate
in your letter, that you will not come westward.  Old England is
to find you out, and then the New will have no charm.  For me it
will be the worst;  for you, not.  A man, a few men, cannot be to
you (with your ministering eyes) that which you should travel far
to find.  Moreover, I observe that America looks, to those who
come hither, as unromantic and unexciting as the Dutch canals.  I
see plainly that our Society, for the most part, is as bigoted to
the _respectabilities_ of religion and education as yours;  that
there is no more appetite for a revelation here than elsewhere;
and the educated class are, of course, less fair-minded than
others.  Yet, in the moments when my eyes are open, I see that
here are rich materials for the philosopher and poet, and, what
is more to your purpose as an artist, that we have had in these
parts no one philosopher or poet to put a sickle to the prairie
wheat.  I have really never believed that you would do us that
crowning grace of coming hither, yet if God should be kinder to
us than our belief, I meant and mean to hold you fast in my
little meadows on the Musketaquid (now Concord) River, and show
you (as in this country we can anywhere) an America in miniature
in the April or November town meeting.  Therein should you
conveniently study and master the whole of our hemispherical
politics reduced to a nutshell, and have a new version of
Oxenstiern's little wit;  and yet be consoled by seeing that here
the farmers patient as their bulls of head-boards--provided for
them in relation to distant national objects, by kind editors of
newspapers--do yet their will, and a good will, in their own
parish.  If a wise man would pass by New York, and be content to
sit still in this village a few months, he should get a thorough
native knowledge which no foreigner has yet acquired.  So I leave
you with God, and if any oracle in the great Delphos should say
"Go," why fly to us instantly.  Come and spend a year with me,
and see if I cannot respect your retirements.

I must love you for your interest in me and my way of life, and
the more that we only look for good-nature in the creative class.
They pay the tag of grandeur, and, attracted irresistibly to
make, their living is usually weak and hapless.  But you are so
companionable--God has made you Man as well as Poet--that I
lament the three thousand miles of mountainous water.  Burns
might have added a better verse to his poem, importing that one
might write Iliads or Hamlets, and yet come short of Truth by
infinity, as every written word must;  but "the man's the gowd
for a' that."  And I heartily thank the Lady for her good-will.
Please God she may be already well.  We all grieve to know of her
ill health.  People who have seen her never stop with _Mr._
Carlyle, but count him thrice blest in her.  My wife believes in
nothing for her but the American voyage.  I shall never cease to
expect you both until you come.

My boy is five months old, he is called Waldo,--a lovely wonder
that made the Universe look friendlier to me.

My Wife, one of your best lovers, sends her affectionate regards
to Mrs. Carlyle, and says that she takes exception in your
letters only to that sentence that she would go to Scotland if
you came here.  My Wife beseeches her to come and possess her
new-dressed chamber.  Do not cease to write whenever you can
spare me an hour.  A man named Bronson Alcott is great, and one
of the jewels we have to show you.  Good bye.

R.W. Emerson

The second edition of _Sartor_ is out and sells well.  I
learned the other day that twenty-five copies of it were ordered
for England.  It was very amiable of you, that word about it
in _Mirabeau._




XVI. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Friend,--A word must go to Concord in answer to your last
kind word.  It reached me, that word of yours, on the morning of
a most unspeakable day;  the day when I, half dead with fret,
agitation, and exasperation, was to address extempore an audience
of London quality people on the subject of German Literature!
The heart's wish of me was that I might be left in deepest
oblivion, wrapped in blankets and silence, not speaking, not
spoken to, for a twelvemonth to come.  My Printers had only let
me go, out of their Treadmill, the day before.  However, all that
is over now;  and I am still here alive to write to you, and hope
for better days.

Almost a month ago there went a copy of a Book called _French
Revolution,_ with your address on it, over to Red-Lion Square,
and thence, as old Rich declared, himself now _emeritus,_ back to
one Kennet (I think) near Covent Garden;  who professes to
correspond with Hilliard and Company, Boston, and undertook the
service.  The Book is not gone yet, I understand;  but Kennet
engages that it shall leave Liverpool infallibly on the 5th of
June.  I wish you a happy reading of it, therefore:  it is the
only copy of my sending that has crossed the water.  Ill printed
(there are many errors, one or two gross ones), ill written, ill
thought!  But in fine it _is_ off my hands:  that is a fact worth
all others.  As to its reception here or elsewhere, I anticipate
nothing or little.  Gabble, gabble, the astonishment of the dull
public brain is likely to be considerable, and its ejaculations
unedifying.  We will let it go its way.  Beat this thing, I say
always, under thy dull hoofs, O dull Public! trample it and
tumble it into all sinks and kennels;  if thou canst kill it,
kill it in God's name:  if thou canst not kill it, why then thou
wilt not.

By the by, speaking of dull Publics, I ought to say that I have
seen a review of myself in the _Christian Examiner_ (I think that
is it) of Boston;  the author of which, if you know him, I desire
you to thank on my part.  For if a dull million is good, then
withal a seeing unit or two is also good.  This man images back a
beautiful idealized Clothes-Philosopher, very satisfactory to
look upon;  in whose beatified features I did verily detect more
similitude to what I myself meant to be, than in any or all the
other criticisms I have yet seen written of me.  That a man see
himself reflected from the soul of his brother-man in this
brotherly improved way:  there surely is one of the most
legitimate joys of existence.  Friend Ripley took the trouble to
send me this Review, in which I detected an Article of his own;
there came also some Discourses of his much to be approved of;  a
Newspaper passage-of-fence with a Philistine of yours;  and a set
of Essays on Progress-of-the-species and such like by a man whom
I grieved to see confusing himself with that.  Progress of the
species is a thing I can get no good of at all.  These Books,
which Miss Martineau has borrowed from me, did not arrive till
three weeks ago or less.  I pray you to thank Ripley for them
very kindly;  which at present I still have not time to do.  He
seems to me a good man, with good aims;  with considerable
natural health of mind, wherein all goodness is likely to grow
better, all clearness to grow clearer.  Miss Martineau laments
that he does not fling himself, or not with the due impetuosity,
into the Black Controversy;  a thing lamentable in the extreme,
when one considers what a world this is, and how perfect it would
be could Mungo once get his stupid case rectified, and eat his
squash as a stupid _Apprentice_ instead of stupid _Slave!_

Miss Martineau's Book on America is out, here and with you.  I
have read it for the good Authoress's sake, whom I love much.
She is one of the strangest phenomena to me.  A genuine little
Poetess, buckramed, swathed like a mummy into Socinian and
Political-Economy formulas;  and yet verily alive in the inside
of that!  "God has given a Prophet to every People in its own
speech," say the Arabs.  Even the English Unitarians were one day
to have their Poet, and the best that could be said for them too
was to be said.  I admire this good lady's integrity, sincerity;
her quick, sharp discernment to the depth it goes:  her love
also is great;  nay, in fact it is too great:  the host of
illustrious obscure mortals whom she produces on you, of
Preachers, Pamphleteers, Antislavers, Able Editors, and other
Atlases bearing (unknown to us) the world on their shoulder, is
absolutely more than enough.  What they say to her Book here I do
not well know.  I fancy the general reception will be good, and
even brilliant.  I saw Mrs. Butler last night, "in an ocean of
blonde and broadcloth," one of those oceans common at present.
Ach Gott!  They are not of Persons, these soirdes, but of
Cloth Figures.

I mean to retreat into Scotland very soon, to repose myself as I
intended.  My Wife continues here with her Mother;  here at least
till the weather grow too hot, or a journey to join me seem
otherwise advisable for her.  She is gathering strength, but
continues still weak enough.  I rest myself "on the sunny side of
hedges" in native Annandale, one of the obscurest regions;  no
man shall speak to me, I will speak to no man;  but have
dialogues yonder with the old dumb crags, of the most
unfathomable sort.  Once rested, I think of returning to London
for another season.  Several things are beginning which I ought
to see end before taking up my staff again.  In this enormous
Chaos the very multitude of conflicting perversions produces
something more like a _calm_ than you can elsewhere meet with.
Men let you alone, which is an immense thing:  they do it even
because they have no time to meddle with you.  London, or else
the Backwoods of America, or Craigenputtock!  We shall see.

I still beg the comfort of hearing from you.  I am sick of soul
and body, but not incurable;  the loving word of a Waldo Emerson
is as balm to me, medicinal now more than ever.  My Wife
earnestly joins me in love to the Concord Household.  May a
blessing be in it, on one and all!  I do nowise give up the idea
of sojourning there one time yet.  On the contrary, it seems
almost certain that I shall.  Good be with you.

Yours always,
T. Carlyle




XVII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Such a gift as the _French Revolution_ demanded
a speedier acknowledgment.  But you mountaineers that can scale
Andes before breakfast for an airing have no measures for the
performance of lowlanders and valetudinarians.  I am ashamed to
think, and will not tell, what little things have kept me silent.

The _French Revolution_ did not reach me until three weeks ago,
having had at least two long pauses by the way, as I find, since
landing.  Between many visits received, and some literary
haranguing done, I have read two volumes and half the third and I
think you a very good giant;  disporting yourself with an
original and vast ambition of fun:  pleasure and peace not being
strong enough for you, you choose to suck pain also, and teach
fever and famine to dance and sing.  I think you have written a
wonderful book, which will last a very long time.  I see that you
have created a history, which the world will own to be such.  You
have recognized the existence of other persons than officers, and
of other relations than civism.  You have broken away from all
books, and written a mind.  It is a brave experiment, and the
success is great.  We have men in your story and not names
merely;  always men, though I may doubt sometimes whether I have
the historic men.  We have great facts--and selected facts--truly
set down.  We have always the co-presence of Humanity along with
the imperfect damaged individuals.  The soul's right of wonder is
still left to us;  and we have righteous praise and doom awarded,
assuredly without cant.  Yes, comfort yourself on that
particular, O ungodliest divine man! thou cantest never.  Finally
we have not--a dull word.  Never was there a style so rapid as
yours,--which no reader can outrun;  and so it is for the most
intelligent.  I suppose nothing will astonish more than the
audacious wit and cheerfulness which no tragedy and no magnitude
of events can overpower or daunt.  Henry VIII loved a Man, and I
see with joy my bard always equal to the crisis he represents.
And so I thank you for your labor, and feel that your
contemporaries ought to say, All hail, Brother! live forever:
not only in the great Soul which thou largely inhalest, but also
as a named, person in this thy definite deed.

I will tell you more of the book when I have once got it at focal
distance,--if that can ever be, and muster my objections when I
am sure of their ground.  I insist, of course, that it might be
more simple, less Gothically efflorescent.  You will say no rules
for the illumination of windows can apply to the Aurora borealis.
However, I find refreshment when every now and then a special
fact slips into the narrative couched in sharp and businesslike
terms.  This character-drawing in the book is certainly
admirable;  the lines are ploughed furrows;  but there was cake
and ale before, though thou be virtuous.  Clarendon surely drew
sharp outlines for me in Falkland, Hampden, and the rest, without
defiance or sky-vaulting.  I wish I could talk with you face to
face for one day, and know what your uttermost frankness would
say concerning the book.  I feel assured of its good reception in
this country.  I learned last Saturday that in all eleven hundred
and sixty-six copies of _Sartor_ have been sold.  I have told the
publisher of that book that he must not print the _History_ until
some space has been given to people to import British copies.  I
have ordered Hilliard, Gray, & Co. to import twenty copies as an
experiment.  At the present very high rate of exchange, which
makes a shilling worth thirty cents, they think, with freight and
duties, the book would be too costly here for sale, but we
confide in a speedy fall of Exchange;  then my books shall come.
I am ashamed that you should educate our young men, and that we
should pirate your books.  One day we will have a better law, or
perhaps you will make our law yours.

I had your letter long before your book.  Very good work you have
done in your lifetime, and very generously you adorn and cheer
this pilgrimage of mine by your love.  I find my highest prayer
granted in calling a just and wise man my friend.  Your profuse
benefaction of genius in so few years makes me feel very poor and
useless.  I see that I must go on trust to you and to all the
brave for some longer time, hoping yet to prove one day my truth
and love.  There are in this country so few scholars, that the
services of each studious person are needed to do what he can
for the circulation of thoughts, to the end of making some
counterweight to the money force, and to give such food as he may
to the nigh starving youth.  So I religiously read lectures every
winter, and at other times whenever summoned.  Last year, "the
Philosophy of History," twelve lectures;  and now I meditate a
course on what I call "Ethics."  I peddle out all the wit I can
gather from Time or from Nature, and am pained at heart to see
how thankfully that little is received.

Write to me, good friend, tell me if you went to Scotland,--what
you do, and will do,--tell me that your wife is strong and well
again as when I saw her at Craigenputtock.  I desire to be
affectionately remembered to her.  Tell me when you will come
hither.  I called together a little club a week ago, who spent a
day with me,--counting fifteen souls,--each one of whom warmly
loves you.  So if the _French Revolution_ does not convert the
"dull public" of your native Nineveh, I see not but you must
shake their dust from your shoes and cross the Atlantic to a New
England.  Yours in love and honor.

R. Waldo Emerson

May I trouble you with a commission when you are in the City?
You mention being at the shop of Rich in Red-Lion Square.  Will
you say to him that he sent me some books two or three years ago
without any account of prices annexed?  I wrote him once myself,
once through S. Burdett, bookseller, and since through C.P.
Curtis, Esq., who professes to be his attorney in Boston,--three
times,--to ask for this account.  No answer has ever come.  I
wish he would send me the account, that I may settle it.  If he
persist in his self-denying contumacy, I think you may
immortalize him as a bookseller of the gods.

I shall send you an Oration presently, delivered before a
literary society here, which is now being printed.  Gladly I
hear of the Carlylet--so they say--in the new Westminster.




XVIII. Emerson to Carlyle


My Dear Friend,--Mr. Charles Sumner, a lawyer of high standing
for his age, and editor or one editor of a journal called _The
Jurist,_ and withal a lover of your writings, tells me he is
going to Paris and thence to London, and sets out in a few days.
I cannot, of course, resist his request for a letter to you, nor
let pass the occasion of a greeting.  Health, Joy, and Peace be
with you!  I hope you sit still yet, and do not hastily meditate
new labors.  Phidias need not be always tinkering.  Sit still
like an Egyptian.  Somebody told me the other day that your
friends here might have made a sum for the author by publishing
_Sartor_ themselves, instead of leaving it with a bookseller.
Instantly I wondered why I had never such a thought before, and
went straight to Boston, and have made a bargain with a
bookseller to print the _French Revolution._  It is to be printed
in two volumes of the size of our American _Sartor,_ one thousand
copies, the estimate making the cost of the book say (in dollars
and cents) $1.18 a copy, and the price $2.50.  The bookseller
contracts with me to sell the book at a commission of twenty
percent on that selling price, allowing me however to take at
cost as many copies as I can find subscribers for.  There is yet,
I believe, no other copy in the country than mine:  so I gave him
the first volume, and the printing is begun.  I shall take
care that your friends here shall know my contract with the
bookseller, and so shall give me their names.  Then, if so good a
book can have a tolerable sale, (almost contrary to the nature of
a good book, I know,) I shall sustain with great glee the new
relation of being your banker and attorney.  They have had the
wit in the London _Examiner,_ I find, to praise at last;  and I
mean that our public shall have the entire benefit of that page.
The _Westminster_ they can read themselves.  The printers think
they can get the book out by Christmas.  So it must be long
before I can tell you what cheer.  Meantime do you tell me, I
entreat you, what speed it has had at home.  The best, I hope,
with the wise and good withal.

I have nothing to tell you and no thoughts.  I have promised a
course of Lectures for December, and am far from knowing what I
am to say;  but the way to make sure of fighting into the new
continent is to burn your ships.  The "tender ears," as George
Fox said, of young men are always an effectual call to me
ignorant to speak.  I find myself so much more and freer on the
platform of the lecture-room than in the pulpit, that I shall not
much more use the last;  and do now only in a little country
chapel at the request of simple men to whom I sustain no other
relation than that of preacher.  But I preach in the Lecture-Room
and then it tells, for there is no prescription.  You may laugh,
weep, reason, sing, sneer, or pray, according to your genius.  It
is the new pulpit, and very much in vogue with my northern
countrymen.  This winter, in Boston, we shall have more than
ever:  two or three every night of the week.  When will you come
and redeem your pledge?  The day before yesterday my little boy
was a year old,--no, the day before that,--and I cannot tell you
what delight and what study I find in this little bud of God,
which I heartily desire you also should see.  Good, wise, kind
friend, I shall see you one day.  Let me hear, when you can
write, that Mrs. Carlyle is well again.

R. Waldo Emerson




XIX. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--How long it is since you last heard of me I do
not very accurately know;    but it is too long.  A very long,
ugly, inert, and unproductive chapter of my own history seems to
have passed since then.  Whenever I delay writing, be sure
matters go not well with me;  and do you in that case write to
me, were it again and over again,--unweariable in pity.

I did go to Scotland, for almost three months;  leaving my Wife
here with her Mother.  The poor Wife had fallen so weak that she
gave me real terror in the spring-time, and made the Doctor look
very grave indeed:  she continued too weak for traveling:  I was
worn out as I had never in my life been.  So, on the longest day
of June, I got back to my Mother's cottage;  threw myself down, I
may say, into what we may call the "frightfulest _magnetic
sleep,_" and lay there avoiding the intercourse of men.  Most
wearisome had their gabble become;  almost unearthly.  But indeed
all was unearthly in that humor.  The gushing of my native
brooks, the _sough_ of the old solitary woods, the great roar of
old native Solway (billowing fresh out of your Atlantic, drawn by
the Moon):  all this was a kind of unearthly music to me;  I
cannot tell you how unearthly.  It did not bring me to rest;  yet
_towards_ rest I do think at all events, the time had come when I
behoved to quit it again.  I have been here since September
evidently another little "chapter" or paragraph, _not_ altogether
inert, is getting forward.  But I must not speak of these things.
How can I speak of them on a miserable scrap of blue paper?
Looking into your kind-eyes with my eyes, I could speak:  not
here.  Pity me, my friend, my brother;  yet hope well of me:  if
I can (in all senses) _rightly hold my peace,_ I think much will
yet be well with me.  SILENCE is the great thing I worship at
present;  almost the sole tenant of my Pantheon.  Let a man know
rightly how to hold his peace.  I love to repeat to myself,
"Silence is of Eternity."  Ah me, I think how I could rejoice to
quit these jarring discords and jargonings of Babel, and go far,
far away!  I do believe, if I had the smallest competence of
money to get "food and warmth" with, I would shake the mud of
London from my feet, and go and bury myself in some green place,
and never print any syllable more.  Perhaps it is better as
it is.

But quitting this, we will actually speak (under favor of
"Silence") one very small thing;  a pleasant piece of news.
There is a man here called John Sterling (_Reverend_ John of the
Church of England too), whom I love better than anybody I have
met with, since a certain sky-messenger alighted to me at
Craigenputtock, and vanished in the Blue again.  This Sterling
has written;  but what is far better, he has lived, he is alive.
Across several unsuitable wrappages, of Church-of-Englandism and
others, my heart loves the man.  He is one, and the best, of a
small class extant here, who, nigh drowning in a black wreck of
Infidelity (lighted up by some glare of Radicalism only, now
growing _dim_ too) and about to perish, saved themselves into a
Coleridgian Shovel-hattedness, or determination to _preach,_ to
preach peace, were it only the spent _echo_ of a peace once
preached.  He is still only about thirty;  young;  and I think
will shed the shovel-hat yet perhaps.  Do you ever read
_Blackwood?_  This John Sterling is the "New Contributor" whom
Wilson makes such a rout about, in the November and prior month
"Crystals from a Cavern," &c., which it is well worth your while
to see.  Well, and what then, cry you?--Why then, this John
Sterling has fallen overhead in love with a certain Waldo
Emerson;  that is all.  He saw the little Book _Nature_ lying
here;  and, across a whole _silva silvarum_ of prejudices,
discerned what was in it;  took it to his heart,--and indeed into
his pocket;  and has carried it off to Madeira with him;  whither
unhappily (though now with good hope and expectation) the Doctors
have ordered him.  This is the small piece of pleasant news, that
two sky-messengers (such they were both of them to me) have met
and recognized each other;  and by God's blessing there shall one
day be a trio of us:  call you that nothing?

And so now by a direct transition I am got to the _Oration._  My
friend! you know not what you have done for me there.  It was
long decades of years that I had heard nothing but the infinite
jangling and jabbering, and inarticulate twittering and
screeching, and my soul had sunk down sorrowful, and said there
is no articulate speaking then any more, and thou art solitary
among stranger-creatures? and lo, out of the West comes a clear
utterance, clearly recognizable as a _man's_ voice, and I _have_
a kinsman and brother:  God be thanked for it!  I could have
_wept_ to read that speech;  the clear high melody of it went
tingling through my heart;--I said to my wife, "There, woman!"
She read;  and returned, and charges me to return for answer,
"that there had been nothing met with like it since Schiller went
silent."  My brave Emerson!  And all this has been lying silent,
quite tranquil in him, these seven years, and the "vociferous
platitude" dinning his ears on all sides, and he quietly
answering no word;  and a whole world of Thought has silently
built itself in these calm depths, and, the day being come, says
quite softly, as if it were a common thing, "Yes, I _am_ here
too."  Miss Martineau tells me, "Some say it is inspired, some
say it is mad."  Exactly so;  no say could be suitabler.  But for
you, my dear friend, I say and pray heartily:  May God grant you
strength;  for you have a _fearful_ work to do!  Fearful I call
it;  and yet it is great, and the greatest.  O for God's sake
_keep yourself still quiet!_  Do not hasten to write;  you cannot
be too slow about it.  Give no ear to any man's praise or
censure;  know that that is _not_ it:  on the one side is as
Heaven if you have strength to keep silent, and climb unseen;
yet on the other side, yawning always at one's right-hand and
one's left, is the frightfulest Abyss and Pandemonium!  See
Fenimore Cooper;--poor Cooper, he is _down in it;_  and had a
climbing faculty too.  Be steady, be quiet, be in no haste;  and
God speed you well!  My space is done.

And so adieu, for this time.  You must write soon again.  My copy
of the _Oration_ has never come:  how is this?  I could dispose
of a dozen well.--They say I am to lecture again in Spring, _Ay
de mi!_  The "Book" is babbled about sufficiently in several
dialects:  Fraser wants to print my scattered Reviews and Articles;
a pregnant sign.  Teufelsdrockh to precede.  The man "screamed" once
at the name of it in a very musical manner.  He shall not print a
line;  unless he give me money for it, more or less.  I have had
enough of printing for one while,--thrown into "magnetic sleep"
by it!  Farewell my brother.

T. Carlyle

O. Rich, it seems, is in Spain.  His representative assured me,
some weeks since, that the Account was now sent.  There is an
Article on Sir W. Scott:  shocking;  invitissima Minerva!

Miss Martineau charges me to send kind remembrances to you and
your Lady:  her words were kinder than I have room for here.--Can
you not, in defect or delay of Letter, send me a Massachusetts
Newspaper?  I think it costs little or almost nothing now;  and I
shall know your hand.




XX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--It is ten days now--ten cold days--that your
last letter has kept my heart warm, and I have not been able to
write before.  I have just finished--Wednesday evening--a course
of lectures which I ambitiously baptized "Human Culture," and
read once a week to the curious in Boston.  I could write nothing
else the while, for weariness of the week's stated scribbling.
Now I am free as a wood-bird, and can take up the pen without
fretting or fear.  Your letter should, and nearly did, make me
jump for joy,--fine things about our poor speech at Cambridge,--
fine things from CARLYLE.  Scarcely could we maintain a decorous
gravity on the occasion.  And then news of a friend, who is also
Carlyle's friend.  What has life better to offer than such
tidings?  You may suppose I went directly and got me _Blackwood,_
and read the prose and the verse of John Sterling, and saw that
my man had a head and a heart, and spent an hour or two very
happily in spelling his biography out of his own hand;--a species
of palmistry in which I have a perfect reliance.  I found many
incidents grave and gay and beautiful, and have determined to
love him very much.  In this romancing of the gentle affections
we are children evermore.  We forget the age of life, the
barriers so thin yet so adamantean of space and circumstance;
and I have had the rarest poems self-singing in my head of brave
men that work and conspire in a perfect intelligence across seas
and conditions--and meet at last.  I heartily pray that the Sea
and its vineyards may cheer with warm medicinal breath a Voyager
so kind and noble.

For the _Oration,_ I am so elated with your goodwill that I begin
to fear your heart has betrayed your head this time, and so the
praise is not good on Parnassus but only in friendship.  I sent
it diffidently (I did send it through bookselling Munroe) to you,
and was not a little surprised by your generous commendations.
Yet here it interested young men a good deal for an academical
performance, and an edition of five hundred was disposed of in a
month.  A new edition is now printing, and I will send you some
copies presently to give to anybody who you think will read.

I have a little budget of news myself.  I hope you had my letter
--sent by young Sumner--saying that we meant to print the _French
Revolution_ here for the Author's benefit.  It was published on
the 25th of December.  It is published at my risk, the
booksellers agreeing to let me have at cost all the copies I can
get subscriptions for.  All the rest they are to sell and to have
twenty percent on the retail price for their commission.  The
selling price of the book is $2.50;  the cost of a copy, $1.26;
the bookseller's commission, 50 cts.;  so that T.C. only gains 74
cts. on each copy they sell.  But we have two hundred
subscribers, and on each copy they buy you have $1.26, except in
cases where the distant residence of subscribers makes a cost of
freight.  You ought to have three or four quarters of a dollar
more on each copy, but we put the lowest price on the book in
terror of the Philistines, and to secure its accessibleness to
the economical Public.  We printed one thousand copies:  of
these, five hundred are already sold, in six weeks;  and Brown
the bookseller talks, as I think, much too modestly, of getting
rid of the whole edition in one year.  I say six months.  The
printing, &c. is to be paid and a settlement made in six months
from the day of publication;  and I hope the settlement will be
the final one.  And I confide in sending you seven hundred
dollars at least, as a certificate that you have so many readers
in the West.  Yet, I own, I shake a little at the thought of the
bookseller's account.  Whenever I have seen that species of
document, it was strange how the hopefulest ideal dwindled away
to a dwarfish actual.  But you may be assured I shall on this
occasion summon to the bargain all the Yankee in my constitution,
and multiply and divide like a lion.

The book has the best success with the best.  Young men say it is
the only history they have ever read.  The middle-aged and the
old shake their heads, and cannot make anything of it.  In short,
it has the success of a book which, as people have not fashioned,
has to fashion the people.  It will take some time to win all,
but it wins and will win.  I sent a notice of it to the
_Christian Examiner,_ but the editor sent it all back to me
except the first and last paragraphs;  those he printed.  And the
editor of the _North American_ declined giving a place to a paper
from another friend of yours.  But we shall see.  I am glad you
are to print your _Miscellanies;_  but--forgive our Transatlantic
effrontery--we are beforehand of you, and we are already
selecting a couple of volumes from the same, and shall print them
on the same plan as the _History,_ and hope so to turn a penny
for our friend again.  I surely should not do this thing without
consulting you as to the selection but that I had no choice.  If
I waited, the bookseller would have done it himself, and carried
off the profit.  I sent you (to Kennet) a copy of the _French
Revolution._  I regret exceedingly the printer's blunder about
the numbering the Books in the volumes, but he had warranted me
in a literal, punctual reprint of the copy without its leaving
his office, and I trusted him.  I am told there are many errors.
I am going to see for myself.  I have filled my paper, and not
yet said a word of how many things.  You tell me how ill was Mrs.
C., and you do not tell me that she is well again.  But I see
plainly that I must take speedily another sheet.  I love
you always.

R.W. Emerson




XXI. Emerson to Carlyle

Boston, 12 March, 1838

My Dear Friend,--Here in a bookseller's shop I have secured a
stool and corner to say a swift benison.  Mr. Bancroft told me
that the presence of English Lord Gosford in town would give me a
safe conveyance of pamphlets to you, so I send some _Orations_ of
which you said so kind and cheering words.  Give them to any one
who will read them.  I have written names in three.  You have, I
hope, got the letter sent nearly a month ago, giving account of
our reprint of the _French Revolution,_ and have received a copy
of the same.  I learn from the bookseller today that six hundred
and fifty copies are sold, and the book continues to sell.  So I
hope that our settlement at the end of six months will be final,
or nearly so.

I had nearly closed my agreement the other day with a publisher
for the emission of _Carlyle's Miscellanies,_ when just in the
last hour comes word from E.G. Loring that he has an authentic
catalogue from the Bard himself.  Now I have that, and could wish
Loring had communicated his plan to me at first, or that I had
bad wit enough to have undertaken this matter long ago and
conferred with you.  I designed nothing for you or your friends;
but merely a lucrative book for our daily market that would have
yielded a pecuniary compensation to you, such as we are all bound
to make, and have bought our Socrates a cloak.  Loring
contemplated something quite different,--a "Complete Works,"
etc.,--and now clamors for the same thing, and I do not know but
I shall have to gratify him and others at the risk of injury to
this my vulgar hope of dollars,--that innate idea of the American
mind.  This I shall settle in a few days.  No copyright can be
secured here for an English book unless it contain original
matter:  But my moments are going, and I can only promise to
write you quickly, at home and at leisure, for I have just been
reading the _History_ again with many, many thoughts, and I
revere, wonder at, and love you.

R. Waldo Emerson




XXII. Carlyle to Emerson

Chelsea, London, 16 March, 1838

My Dear Emerson,--Your letter through Sumner was sent by him from
Paris about a month ago;  the man himself has not yet made his
appearance, or been heard of in these parts:  he shall be very
welcome to me, arrive when he will.  The February letter came
yesterday, by direct conveyance from Dartmouth.  I answer it
today rather than tomorrow;  I may not for long have a day freer
than this.  _Fronte capillata, post est occasio calva:_  true
either in Latin or English!

You send me good news, as usual.  You have been very brisk and
helpful in this business of the _Revolution_ Book, and I give you
many thanks and commendations.  It will be a very brave day when
cash actually reaches me, no matter what the _number_ of the
coins, whether seven or seven hundred, out of Yankee-land;  and
strange enough, what is not unlikely, if it be the _first_ cash I
realize for that piece of work,--Angle-land continuing still
_in_solvent to me!  Well, it is a wide Motherland we have here,
or are getting to have, from Bass's Straits all round to Columbia
River, already almost circling the Globe:  it must be hard with a
man if somewhere or other he find not some one or other to take
his part, and stand by him a little!  Blessings on you, my
brother:  nay, your work is already twice blessed.--I believe
after all, with the aid of my Scotch thrift, I shall not be
absolutely thrown into the streets here, or reduced to borrow,
and become the slave of somebody, for a morsel of bread.  Thank
God, no!  Nay, of late I begin entirely to despise that whole
matter, so as I never hitherto despised it:  "Thou beggarliest
Spectre of Beggary that hast chased me ever since I was man, come
on then, in the Devil's name, let us see what is in thee!  Will
the Soul of a man, with Eternity within a few years of it, quail
before _thee?_"  Better, however, is my good pious Mother's
version of it:  "They cannot take God's Providence from thee;
thou hast never wanted yet."

But to go on with business;  and the republication of books in
that Transoceanic England, New and improved Edition of England.
In January last, if I recollect right, Miss Martineau, in the
name of a certain Mr. Loring, applied to me for a correct List of
all my fugitive Papers;  the said Mr. Loring meaning to publish
them for my behoof.  This List she, though not without
solicitation, for I had small hope in it, did at last obtain, and
send, coupled with a request from me that you should be consulted
in the matter.  Now it appears you had of yourself previously
determined on something of the same sort, and probably are far on
with the printing of your Two select volumes.  I confess myself
greatly better pleased with it on that footing than on another.
Who Mr. Loring may be I know not, with any certainty, at first
hand;  but who Waldo Emerson is I do know;  and more than one god
from the machine is not necessary.  I pray you, thank Mr. Loring
for his goodness towards me (his intents are evidently charitable
and not wicked);  but consider yourself as in nowise bound at all
by that blotted Paper he has, but do the best you can for me,
consulting with him or not taking any counsel just as you see to
be fittest on the spot.  And so Heaven prosper you, both in your
"aroused Yankee" state, and in all others;--and let us for the
present consider that we have enough about Books and Guineas.  I
must add, however, that Fraser and I have yet made no bargain.
  We found, on computing, that there would be five good
volumes, including _Teufelsdrockh._  For an edition of Seven
hundred and Fifty I demanded L50 a volume, and Fraser refused:
the poor man then fell dangerously ill, and there could not be a
word farther said on the subject;  till very lately, when it
again became possible, but has not yet been put in practice.  All
the world cries out, Why _do you_ publish with Fraser?  "Because
my soul is sick of Booksellers, and of trade, and deception, and
'need and greed' altogether;  and this poor Fraser, not worse
than the rest of them, has in some sort grown less hideous to me
by custom."  I fancy, however, either Fraser will publish these
things before long;  or some Samaritan here will take me to some
bolder brother of the trade that will.  Great Samuel Johnson
assisted at the beginning of Bibliopoly;  small Thomas Carlyle
assists at the ending of it:  both are sorrowful seasons for a
man.  For the rest, people here continue to receive that
_Revolution_ very much as you say they do _there:_  I am right
well quit of it;  and the elderly gentlemen on both sides of the
water may take comfort, they will not soon have to suffer the
like again.  But really England is wonderfully changed within
these ten years;  the old gentlemen all shrunk into nooks, some
of them even voting with the young.--The American ill-printed Two
and-a-half-dollars Copy shall, for Emerson's sake, be welcomest
to me of all.  Kennet will send it when it comes.

The _Oration_ did arrive, with my name on it, one snowy night in
January.  It is off to Madeira;  probably there now.  I can
dispose of a score of copies to good advantage.  Friend Sterling
has done the best of all his things in the current _Blackwood,_--
"Crystals from a Cavern,"--which see.  He writes kind things of
you from Madeira, in expectation of the Speech.  I will gratify
him with your message;  he is to be here in May;  better, we
hope, and in the way towards safety.  Miss Martineau has given
you a luminous section in her new Book about America;  you are
one of the American "Originals,"--the good Harriet!

And now I have but one thing to add and to repeat:  Be quiet, be
quiet!  The fire that is in one's own stomach is enough, without
foreign bellows to blow it ever and anon.  My whole heart
shudders at the thrice-wretched self-combustion into which I see
all manner of poor paper-lanterns go up, the wind of "popularity"
puffing at them, and nothing left erelong but ashes and sooty
wreck.  It is sad, most sad.  I shun all such persons and
circles, as much as possible;  and pray the gods to make me a
brick layer's hodbearer rather.  O the "cabriolets, neatflies,"
and blue twaddlers of both sexes therein, that drive many a poor
Mrs. Rigmarole to the Devil!--As for me, I continue doing as
nearly nothing as I can manage.  I decline all invitations of
society that are declinable:  a London rout is one of the maddest
things under the moon;  a London dinner makes me sicker for a
week, and I say often, It is better to be even dull than to be
witty, better to be silent than to speak.

Curious:  your Course of Lectures "on Human Culture" seems to be
on the very subject I am to discourse upon here in May coming;
but I am to call it "on the History of Literature," and _speak_
it, not write it.  While you read this, I shall be in the
agonies!  Ah me! often when I think of the matter, how my one
sole wish is to be left to hold my tongue, and by what bayonets
of Necessity clapt to my back I am driven into that Lecture-room,
and in what mood, and ordered to speak or die, I feel as if my
only utterance should be a flood of tears and blubbering!  But
that, clearly, will not do.  Then again I think it is perhaps
better so;  who knows?  At all events, we will try what is in
this Lecturing in London.  If something, well;  if nothing, why
also well.  But I do want to get out of these coils for a tune.
My Brother is to be home again in May;  if he go back to Italy,
if our Lecturing proved productive, why might we not all set off
thitherward for the winter coming?  There is a dream to that
effect.  It would suit my wife, too:  she was alarmingly weak
this time twelvemonth;  and I can only yet tell you that she is
stronger, not strong:  she has not ventured out except at midday,
and rarely then, since Autumn last;  she sits here patiently
waiting Summer, and charges me to send you her love.--America
also always lies in the background:  I do believe, if I live
long, I shall get to Concord one day.  Your wife must love me.
If the little Boy be a well-behaved fellow, he shall ride on my
back yet:  if not, tell him I will have nothing to do with him,
the riotous little imp that he is.  And so God bless you always,
my dear friend!  Your affectionate,

T. Carlyle




XXIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Yesterday I had your letter of March.  It
quickens my purpose (always all but ripe) to write to you.  If it
had come earlier I should have been confirmed in my original
purpose of publishing _Select Miscellanies of T.C._  As it is, we
are far on in the printing of the first two volumes (to make 900
pages) of the papers as they stand in your list.  And now I find
we shall only get as far as the seventeenth or eighteenth
article.  I regret it, because this book will not embrace those
papers I chiefly desire to provide people with, and it may be
some time, in these years of bankruptcy and famine, before we
shall think it prudent to publish two volumes more.  But Loring
is a good man, and thinks that many desire to see the sources of
Nile.  I, for my part, fancy that to meet the taste of the
readers we should publish _from the last_ backwards, beginning
with the paper on Scott, which has had the best reception ever
known.  Carlyleism is becoming so fashionable that the most
austere Seniors are glad to qualify their reprobation by
applauding this review.  I have agreed with the bookseller
publishing the _Miscellanies_ that he is to guarantee to you one
dollar on every copy he sells;  and you are to have the total
profit on every copy subscribed for.  The retail price [is] to be
$2.50.  The cost of the work is not yet precisely ascertained.
The work will probably appear in six or seven weeks.  We print
one thousand copies.  So whenever it is sold you shall have one
thousand dollars.

The _French Revolution_ continues to find friends and purchasers.
It has gone to New Orleans, to Nashville, to Vicksburg.  I have
not been in Boston lately, but have determined that nearly or
quite eight hundred copies should be gone.  On the 1st of July I
shall make up accounts with the booksellers, and I hope to make
you the most favorable returns.  I shall use the advice of
Barnard, Adams, & Co. in regard to remittances.

When you publish your next book I think you must send it out to
me in sheets, and let us print it here contemporaneously with the
English edition.  The _eclat_ of so new a book would help the
sale very much.

But a better device would be, that you should embark in the
"Victoria" steamer, and come in a fortnight to New York, and in
twenty-four hours more to Concord.  Your study arm-chair,
fireplace, and bed, long vacant, auguring expect you.  Then you
shall revise your proofs and dictate wit and learning to the New
World.  Think of it in good earnest.  In aid of your friendliest
purpose, I will set down some of the facts.  I occupy, or
_improve,_ as we Yankees say, two acres only of God's earth;  on
which is my house, my kitchen-garden, my orchard of thirty young
trees, my empty barn.  My house is now a very good one for
comfort, and abounding in room.  Besides my house, I have, I
believe, $22,000, whose income in ordinary years is six percent.
I have no other tithe or glebe except the income of my winter
lectures, which was last winter $800.  Well, with this income,
here at home, I am a rich man.  I stay at home and go
abroad at my own instance.  I have food, warmth, leisure, books,
friends.  Go away from home, I am rich no longer.  I never have a
dollar to spend on a fancy.  As no wise man, I suppose, ever was
rich in the sense of _freedom to spend,_ because of the
inundation of claims, so neither am I, who am not wise.  But at
home, I am rich,--rich enough for ten brothers.  My wife Lidian
is an incarnation of Christianity,--I call her Asia,--and keeps
my philosophy from Antinomianism;  my mother, whitest, mildest,
most conservative of ladies, whose only exception to her
universal preference for old things is her son;  my boy, a piece
of love and sunshine, well worth my watching from morning to
night;--these, and three domestic women, who cook and sew and run
for us, make all my household.  Here I sit and read and write,
with very little system, and, as far as regards composition, with
the most fragmentary result:  paragraphs incompressible, each
sentence an infinitely repellent particle.

In summer, with the aid of a neighbor, I manage my garden;  and a
week ago I set out on the west side of my house forty young pine
trees to protect me or my son from the wind of January.  The
ornament of the place is the occasional presence of some ten or
twelve persons, good and wise, who visit us in the course of the
year.--But my story is too long already.  God grant that you will
come and bring that blessed wife, whose protracted illness we
heartily grieve to learn, and whom a voyage and my wife's and my
mother's nursing would in less than a twelvemonth restore to
blooming health.  My wife sends to her this message:  "Come, and
I will be to you a sister."  What have you to do with Italy?
Your genius tendeth to the New, to the West.  Come and live with
me a year, and if you do not like New England well enough to
stay, one of these years (when the _History_ has passed its ten
editions, and been translated into as many languages) I will come
and dwell with you.

I gladly hear what you say of Sterling.  I am foolish enough to
be delighted with being an object of kindness to a man I have
never seen, and who has not seen me.  I have not yet got the
_Blackwood_ for March, which I long to see, but the other three
papers I have read with great satisfaction.  They lie here on my
table.  But he must get well.

As to Miss Martineau, I know not well what to say.  Meaning to do
me a signal kindness (and a kindness quite out of all measure of
justice) she does me a great annoyance,--to take away from me my
privacy and thrust me before my time (if ever there be a time)
into the arena of the gladiators to be stared at.  I was ashamed
to read, and am ashamed to remember.  Yet, as you see her, I
would not be wanting in gratitude to a gifted and generous lady
who so liberally transfigures our demerits.  So you shall tell
her, if you please, that I read all her book with pleasure but
that part, and if ever I shall travel West or South, I think she
has furnished me with the eyes.  Farewell, dear wise man.  I
think your poverty honorable above the common brightness of that
thorn-crown of the great.  It earns you the love of men and the
praise of a thousand years.  Yet I hope the angelical Beldame,
all-helping, all-hated, has given you her last lessons, and,
finding you so striding a proficient, will dismiss you to a
hundred editions and the adoration of the booksellers.

R.W. Emerson

I have never heard from Rich, who, you wrote, had sent his
account to me.  Let him direct to me at Concord.

A young engineer in Cambridge, by name McKean, volunteers his
services in correcting the proofs of the _Miscellanies,_--and he
has your errata,--for the love of the reading.  Shall we have
anthracite coal or wood in your chamber?  My old mother is glad
you are coming.



XXIV. Carlyle to Emerson

Chelsea, London, 15 June, 1838

My Dear Emerson,--Our correspondence has fallen into a raveled
state;  which would doubtless clear itself could I afford to wait
for your next Letter, probably tumbling over the Atlantic brine
about this very moment:  but I cannot afford to wait;  I must
write straightway.  Your answer to this will bring matters round
again.  I have had two irregular Notes of your writing, or
perhaps three;  two dated March, one by Mr. Bancroft's Parcel,--
bringing Twelve _Orations_ withal;  then some ten days later,
just in this very time, another Note by Mr. Sumner, whom I have
not yet succeeded in seeing, though I have attempted it, and hope
soon to do it.  The Letter he forwarded me from Paris was
acknowledged already, I think.  And now if the Atlantic will but
float me in safe that other promised Letter!

I got your American _French Revolution_ a good while ago.  It
seems to me a very pretty Book indeed, wonderfully so for the
money;  neither does it seem what we can call _incorrectly_
printed so far as I have seen;  compared with the last _Sartor_
it is correctness itself.  Many thanks to you, my Friend, and
much good may it do us all!  Should there be any more reprinting,
I will request you to rectify at least the three following
errors, copied out of the English text indeed;  nay, mark them in
your own New-English copy, whether there be reprinting or not:
Vol. I. p. 81, last paragraph, _for_ September _read_ August;
Vol. II. p. 344, first line, _for_ book of prayer _read_ look of
prayer;  p. 357, _for_ blank _read_ black (2d paragraph, "all
black ").  And so _basta._  And let us be well content about this
F.R. on both sides of the water, yours as well as mine.

"Too many cooks"! the Proverb says:  it is pity if this new
apparition of a Mr. Loring should spoil the broth.  But I
calculate you will adjust it well and smoothly between you, some
way or other.  How you shall adjust it, or have adjusted it, is
what I am practically anxious now to learn.  For you are to
understand that our English Edition has come to depend partly on
yours.  After long higgling with the foolish Fraser, I have
quitted him, quite quietly, and given "Saunders and Ottley,
Conduit Street," the privilege of printing a small edition of
_Teufelsdrockh_ (Five Hundred copies), with a prospect of the
"Miscellaneous Writings" soon following.  Saunders and Ottley are
at least more reputable persons, they are useful to me also in
the business of Lecturing.  _Teufelsdrockh_ is at Press, to be
out very soon;  I will send you a correct copy, the only
one in America I fancy.  The enterprise here too is on the
"half-profits" plan, which I compute generally to mean equal
partition of the oyster-shells and a net result of zero.  But the
thing will be economically useful to me otherwise;  as a
publication of the "Miscellaneous" also would be;  which latter,
however, I confess myself extremely unwilling to undertake the
trouble of for _nothing._  To me they are grown or fast growing
_obsolete,_ these Miscellanies, for most part;  if money lie not
in them, what does lie for me?  Now it strikes me you will infallibly
edit these things, at least as well as I, and are doing it at any
rate;  your printing too would seem to be cheaper than ours:  I
said to Saunders and Ottley, Why not have two hundred or three
hundred of this American Edition struck off with "London:
Saunders and Ottley, Conduit Street," on the title-page, and sent
over hither in sheets at what price they have cost my friends
yonder?  Saunders of course threw cold water on this project, but
was obliged to admit that there would be some profit in it, and
that for me it would be far easier.  The grand profit for me is
that people would understand better what I mean, and come better
about me if I lectured again, which seems the only way of getting
any wages at all for me here at present.  Pray meditate my
project, if it be not already too late, hear what your Booksellers
say about it, and understand that I will not in any case set to
printing till I hear from you in answer to this.

How my sheet is filling with dull talk about mere economics!  I
must still add that the _Lecturing_ I talked of, last time, is
verily over now;  and well over.  The superfine people listened
to the rough utterance with patience, with favor, increasing to
the last.  I sent you a Newspaper once, to indicate that it was
in progress.  I know not yet what the money result is;  but I
suppose it will enable us to exist here thriftily another year;
not without hope of at worst doing the like again when the time
comes.  It is a great novelty in my lot;  felt as a very
considerable blessing;  and really it has arrived, if it have
arrived, in _due_ time, for I had begun to get quite impatient of
the other method.  Poverty and Youth may do;  Poverty and Age go
badly together.--For the rest, I feel fretted to fiddle-strings;
my head and heart all heated, sick,--ah me!  The question as ever
is:  Rest.  But then where?  My Brother invites us to come to
Rome for the winter;  my poor sick Wife might perhaps profit by
it;  as for me, Natty Leatherstocking's lodge in the Western
Wood, I think, were welcomer still.  I have a great mind, too, to
run off and see my Mother, by the new railways.  What we shall
do, whether not stay quietly here, must remain uncertain for a
week or two.  Write you always hither, till you hear otherwise.

The _Orations_ were right welcome;  my _Madeira_ one, returned
thence with Sterling, was circulating over the West of England.
Sterling and Harriet stretched out the right hand with wreathed
smiles.  I have read, a second or third time.  Robert Southey has
got a copy, for his own behoof and that of _Lake_land:  if he
keep his word as to _me,_ he may do as much for you, or more.
Copies are at Cambridge;  among the Oxonians too;  I have with
stingy discretion distributed all my copies but two.  Old Rogers,
a grim old Dilettante, full of sardonic sense, was heard saying,
"It is German Poetry given out in American Prose."  Friend
Emerson ought to be content;--and has now above all things, as I
said, to _be in no haste._  Slow fire does make sweet malt:  how
true, how true!  Also his next work ought to be a _concrete_
thing;  not _theory_ any longer, but _deed._  Let him "live it,"
as he says;  that is the way to come to "painting of it."
Geometry and the art of Design being once well over, take the
brush, and _andar con Dios!_

Mrs. Child has sent me a Book, _Philothea,_ and a most
magnanimous epistle.  I have answered as I could.  The Book is
beautiful, but of a _hectic_ beauty;  to me not pleasant, even
fatal looking.  Such things grow not in the ground, on Mother
Earth's honest bosom, but in hothouses,--Sentimental-Calvinist
fire traceable underneath!  Bancroft also is of the hothouse
partly:  I have a Note to send him by Sumner;  do you thank him
meanwhile, and say nothing about _hothouses!_  But, on the whole,
men ought in New England, too to "swallow their formulas";
there is no freedom till then:  yet hitherto I find only one man
there who seems fairly on the way towards that, or arrived at
that.  Good speed to _him._  I had to send my Wife's love:  she
is not dangerously ill;  but always feeble, and has to _struggle_
to keep erect;  the summer always improves her, and this summer
too.  Adieu, dear Friend;  may Good always be with you and yours.

T. Carlyle


XXV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Sir,--I am in town today to get what money the booksellers
will relinquish from their faithful gripe, and have succeeded now
in obtaining a first instalment, however small.  I enclose to you
a bill of exchange for fifty pounds sterling, which costs here
exactly $242.22, the rate of exchange being nine percent.  I
shall not today trouble you with any account, for my letter
must be quickly ready to go by the steam-packet.  An exact
account has been rendered to me, which, though its present
balance in our favor is less than I expected, yet, as far as I
understand it, agrees well with all that has been promised:  at
least the balance in our favor when the edition is sold, which
the booksellers assure me will assuredly be done within a year
from the publication, must be seven hundred and sixty dollars,
and what more Heaven and the subscribers may grant.  I shall
follow this letter and bill by a duplicate of the bill in the
next packet.

The _Miscellanies_ is published in two volumes, a copy of which
goes to you immediately.  Munroe tells me that two hundred and
fifty copies of it are already sold.  Writing in a bookshop, my
dear friend, I have no power to say aught than that I am heartily
and always,

Yours,
R. Waldo Emerson




XXVI. Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, 6 August, 1838

My Dear Friend,--The swift ships are slow when they carry our
letters.  Your letter dated the 15th of June arrived here last
Friday, the 3d of August.  That day I was in Boston, and I have
only now got the information necessary to answer it.  You have
probably already learned from my letter sent by the "Royal
William" (enclosing a bill of exchange for L50), that our first
two volumes of the _Miscellanies_ are published.  I have sent you
a copy.  The edition consists of one thousand copies.  Of these
five hundred are bound, five hundred remain in sheets.  The
title-pages, of course, are all printed alike;  but the
publishers assure me that new title-pages can be struck off at a
trifling expense, with the imprint of Saunders and Ottley.  The
cost of a copy in sheets or "folded" (if that means somewhat
more?) is eighty-nine cents;  and bound is $1.15.  The retail
price is $2.50 a copy;  and the author's profit, $1;  and the
bookseller's, 35 cents per copy;  according to my understanding
of the written contract.

Here I believe you have all the material facts.  I think there is
no doubt that the book will sell very well here.  But if, for the
reasons you suggest, you wish any part of it, you can have it as
soon as ships can bring your will.

When you see your copy, you will perceive that we have printed
half the matter.  I should presently begin to print the
remainder, inclusive of the Article on Lockhart's Scott, in two
more volumes;  but now I think I shall wait until I hear from
you.  Of those books we will print a larger edition, say twelve
hundred and fifty or fifteen hundred, if you want a part of it in
London.  For I feel confident now that our public here is one
thousand strong.  Write me therefore _by the steam packet_
your wishes.

I am sure you will like our edition.  It has been most carefully
corrected by two young gentlemen who successively volunteered
their services, (the second when the first was called away,) and
who, residing in Cambridge, where the book was printed, could
easilier oversee it.  They are Henry S. McBean, an engineer, and
Charles Stearns Wheeler, a Divinity student,--working both for
love of you.  To one other gentleman I have brought you in debt,
--Rev. Convers Francis (brother of Mrs. Child), who supplied from
his library all the numbers of the _Foreign Review_ from which we
printed the work.  We could not have done without his books, and
he is a noble-hearted man, who rejoices in you.  I have sent to
all three copies of the work as from you, and I shall be glad if
you will remember to sanction this expressly in your next letter.

Thanks for the letter:  thanks for your friendliest seeking of
friends for the poor _Oration._  Poor little pamphlet, to have
gone so far and so high!  I am ashamed.  I shall however send you
a couple more of the thin gentry presently, maugre all your hopes
and cautions.  I have written and read a kind of sermon to the
Senior Class of our Cambridge Theological School a fortnight ago;
and an address to the Literary Societies of Dartmouth College;
for though I hate American pleniloquence, I cannot easily say No
to young men who bid me speak also.  And both these are now in
press.  The first I hear is very offensive.  I will now try to
hold my tongue until next winter.  But I am asked continually
when you will come to Boston.  Your lectures are boldly and
joyfully expected by brave young men.  So do not forget us:  and
if ever the scale-beam trembles, I beseech you, let the love of
me decide for America.  I will not dare to tease you on a matter
of so many relations, and so important, and especially as I have
written out, I believe, my requests in a letter sent two or three
months ago,--but I must see you somewhere, somehow, may it please
God!  I grieve to hear no better news of your wife.  I hoped she
was sound and strong ere this, and can only hope still.  My wife
and I send her our hearty love.

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson





XXVII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--There cannot any right answer be written you
here and now;  yet I must write such answer as I can.  You said,
"by steamship";  and it strikes me with a kind of remorse, on
this my first day of leisure and composure, that I have delayed
so long.  For you must know, this is my Mother's house,--a place
to me unutterable as Hades and the Land of Spectres were;
likewise that my Brother is just home from Italy, and on the wing
thitherward or somewhither swiftly again;  in a word, that all is
confusion and flutter with me here,--fit only for _silence!_  My
Wife sent me off hitherward, very sickly and unhappy, out of the
London dust, several weeks ago;  I lingered in Fifeshire, I was
in Edinburgh, in Roxburghshire;  have some calls to Cumberland,
which I believe I must refuse;  and prepare to creep homeward
again, refreshed in health, but with a head and heart all
seething and tumbling (as the wont is, in such cases), and averse
to pens beyond all earthly implements.  But my Brother is off
for Dumfries this morning;  you before all others deserve an
hour of my solitude.  I will abide by business;  one must write
about that.

Your Bill and duplicate of a Bill for L50, with the two Letters
that accompanied them, you are to know then, did duly arrive at
Chelsea;  and the larger Letter (of the 6th of August) was
forwarded to me hither some two weeks ago.  I had also, long
before that, one of the friendliest of Letters from you, with a
clear and most inviting description of the Concord Household, its
inmates and appurtenances;  and the announcement, evidently
authentic, that an apartment and heart's welcome was ready there
for my Wife and me;  that we were to come quickly, and stay for a
twelvemonth. Surely no man has such friends as I.  We ought to
say, May the Heavens give us thankful hearts!  For, in truth,
there are blessings which do, like sun-gleams in wild weather,
make this rough life beautiful with rainbows here and there.
Indicating, I suppose, that there is a Sun, and general Heart of
Goodness, behind all that;--for which, as I say again, let us be
thankful evermore.

My Wife says she received your American Bill of so many pounds
sterling for the Revolution Book, with a "pathetic feeling" which
brought "tears" to her eyes.  From beyond the waters there is a
hand held out;  beyond the waters too live brothers.  I would
only the Book were an Epic, a _Dante,_ or undying thing, that New
England might boast in after times of this feat of hers;  and put
stupid, poundless, and penniless Old England to the blush about
it!  But after all, that is no matter;  the feebler the well-
meant Book is, the more "pathetic" is the whole transaction:  and
so we will go on, fuller than ever of "desperate hope" (if you
know what that is), with a feeling one would not give and could
not get for several money-bags;  and say or think, Long live true
friends and Emersons, and (in Scotch phrase) "May ne'er waur be
amang us!"--I will buy something permanent, I think, out of this
L50, and call it either _Ebenezer_ or _Yankee-doodle-doo._  May
good be repaid you manifold, my kind Brother!  may good be ever
with you, my kind Friends all!

But now as to this edition of the _Miscellanies_ (poor things), I
really think my Wife is wisest, who says I ought to leave you
altogether to your own resources with it, America having an art
of making money out of my Books which England is unfortunately
altogether without.  Besides, till I once see the Two Volumes now
under way, and can let a Bookseller see them, there could no
bargain be made on the subject.  We will let it rest there,
therefore.  Go on with your second Two Volumes, as if there were
no England extant, according to your own good judgment.  When I
get to London, I will consult some of the blockheads with the
Book in my hand:  if we do want Two Hundred copies, you can give
us them with a trifling loss.  It is possible they may make some
better proposal about an Edition here:  that depends on the fate
of _Sartor_ here, at present trying itself;  which I have not in
the least ascertained.  For the present, thank as is meet all
friends in your world that have interested themselves for me.
Alas! I have nothing to give them but thanks.  Henry McKean,
Charles Wheeler, Convers Francis;  these Names shall, if it
please Heaven, become Persons for me, one day.  Well!--But I will
say nothing more.  That too is of the things on which all Words
are poor to Silence.  Good to the Good and Kind!

A Letter from me must have crossed that _descriptive_ Concord
one, on the Ocean, I think.  Our correspondence is now standing
on its feet.  I will write to you again, whether I hear from you
or not, so soon as my hand finds its cunning again in London,--so
soon as I can see there what is to be done or said.  All goes
decidedly better, I think.  My Wife was and is much healthier
than last year, than in any late year.  I myself get visibly
quieter my preternatural _Meditations in Hades,_ apropos of this
Annandale of mine, are calm compared with those of last year.  By
another Course of Lectures I have a fair prospect of living for
another season;  nay, people call it a "new profession" I have
devised for myself, and say I may live by it as many years as I
like.  This too is partly the fruit of my poor Book;  one should
not say that it was worth nothing to me even in money.  Last year
I fancied my Audience mainly the readers of it;  drawn round me,
in spite of many things, by force of it.  Let us be content.  I
have Jesuits, Swedenborgians, old Quakeresses, _omne cum Proteus,_
--God help me, no man ever had so confused a public!--I
salute you, my dear Friend, and your hospitable circle.  May
blessings be on your kind household, on your kind hearts!

T. Carlyle

A copy of the English _Teufelsdrockh_ has lain with your name on
it these two months in Chelsea;  waiting an opportunity.  It is
worth nothing to you:  a dingy, ill-managed edition;  but correct
or nearly correct as to printing;  it is right that such should
be in your hands in case of need.  The New England Pamphlets will
be greedily expected.  More than one inquires of me, Has that
Emerson of yours written nothing else?  And I have lent them the
little Book _Nature,_ till it is nearly thumbed to pieces.
Sterling is gone to Italy for the winter since I left town;
swift as a flash!  I cannot teach him the great art of _sitting
still;_  his fine qualities are really like to waste for want
of that.

I read your paragraph to Miss Martineau;  she received it, as she
was bound, with a good grace.  But I doubt, I doubt, O Ralph
Waldo Emerson, thou hast not been sufficiently ecstatic about
her,--thou graceless exception, confirmatory of a rule!  In truth
there _are_ bores, of the first and of all lower magnitudes.
Patience and shuffle the cards.





XXVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I am quite uneasy that I do not hear from you.
On the 21st of July I wrote to you and enclosed a remittance of
L50 by a Bill of Exchange on Baring Brothers, drawn by Chandler,
Howard, & Co., which was sent in the steamer "Royal William."  On
the 2d of August I received your letter of inquiry respecting our
edition of the _Miscellanies,_ and wrote a few days later in
reply, that we could send you out two or three hundred copies of
our first two volumes, in sheets, at eighty-nine cents per copy
of two volumes, and the small additional price of the new title-
page.  I said also that I would wait until I heard from you
before commencing the printing of the last two volumes of the
_Miscellanies,_ and, if you desired it, would print any number of
copies with a title-page for London.  This letter went in a
steamer--he "Great Western" probably--about the 10th or 12th of
August.  (Perhaps I misremember the names [of the steamers], and
the first should be last.)  I have heard nothing from you since.
I trust my letters have not miscarried.  (A third was sent also
by another channel inclosing a duplicate of the Bill of
Exchange.)  With more fervency, I trust that all goes well in the
house of my friend,--and I suppose that you are absent on some
salutary errand of repairs and recreation.  _Use, I pray you,
your earliest_ hour in certifying me of the facts.

One word more in regard to business.  I believe I expressed some
surprise, in the July letter, that the booksellers should have no
greater balance for us at this settlement.  I have since studied
the account better, and see that we shall not be disappointed in
the year of obtaining at least the sum first promised,--seven
hundred and sixty dollars;  but the whole expense of the edition
is paid out of the copies first sold, and our profits depend on
the last sales.  The edition is almost gone, and you shall have
an account at the end of the year.

In a letter within a twelvemonth I have urged you to pay us a
visit in America, and in Concord.  I have believed that you would
come one day, and do believe it.  But if, on your part, you have
been generous and affectionate enough to your friends here--or
curious enough concerning our society--to wish to come, I think
you must postpone, for the present, the satisfaction of your
friendship and your curiosity.  At this moment I would not have
you here, on any account.  The publication of my _Address to the
Divinity College_ (copies of which I sent you) has been the
occasion of an outcry in all our leading local newspapers against
my "infidelity," "pantheism," and "atheism."  The writers warn
all and sundry against me, and against whatever is supposed
to be related to my connection of opinion, &c.;  against
Transcendentalism, Goethe, and _Carlyle._  I am heartily sorry to
see this last aspect of the storm in our washbowl.  For, as
Carlyle is nowise guilty, and has unpopularities of his own, I do
not wish to embroil him in my parish differences.  You were
getting to be a great favorite with us all here, and are daily a
greater with the American public, but just now, _in Boston,_
where I am known as your editor, I fear you lose by the
association.  Now it is indispensable to your right influence
here, that you should never come before our people as one of a
clique, but as a detached, that is, universally associated
man;  so I am happy, as I could not have thought, that you
have not yielded yourself to my entreaties.  Let us wait a
little until this foolish clamor be overblown.  My position
is fortunately such as to put me quite out of the reach of any
real inconvenience from the panic-strikers or the panic-struck;
and, indeed, so far as this uneasiness is a necessary result of
mere inaction of mind, it seems very clear to me that, if I live,
my neighbors must look for a great many more shocks, and perhaps
harder to bear.

The article on German Religious Writers in the last _Foreign
Quarterly Review_ suits our meridian as well as yours;  as is
plainly signified by the circumstance that our newspapers copy
into their columns the opening tirade and _no more._  Who wrote
that paper?  And who wrote the paper on Montaigne in the
_Westminster?_  I read with great satisfaction the Poems and
Thoughts of Archaeus in _Blackwood._  "The Sexton's Daughter" is
a beautiful poem:  and I recognize in them all _the_ Soul, with
joy and love.  Tell me of the author's health and welfare;  or,
will not he love me so much as to write me a letter with his own
hand?  And tell me of yourself, what task of love and wisdom the
Muses impose;  and what happiness the good God sends to you and
yours.  I hope your wife has not forgotten me.

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson


The _Miscellanies,_ Vols. I. and II., are a popular book.  About
five hundred copies have been sold.  The second article on Jean
Paul works with might on the inner man of young men.  I hate to
write you letters on business and facts like this.  There are so
few Friends that I think some time I shall meet you nearer, for
I love you more than is fit to say.  W.H. Channing has written
a critique on you, which I suppose he has sent you, in the
_Boston Review._





XXIX. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Friend,--It is all right;  all your Letters with their
inclosures have arrived in due succession:  the last, inquiring
after the fate of the others, came this morning.  I was in
Scotland, as you partly conjecture;  I wrote to you already
(though not without blamable delay), from my Mother's house in
Annandale, a confused scrawl, which I hope has already got to
hand, and quieted your kind anxieties.  I am as well as usual in
health, my Wife better than usual;  nothing is amiss, except my
negligence and indolence, which has put you to this superfluous
solicitude on my account.  However, I have an additional Letter
by it;  you must pardon me, you must not grudge me that
undeserved pleasure, the reward of evil-doing.  I may well say,
you are a blessing to me on this Earth;  no Letter comes from you
with other than good tidings,--or can come while you live there
to love me.

The Bill was thrust duly into Baring's brass slit "for
acceptance," on my return hither some three weeks ago;  and will,
no doubt, were the days of grace run, come out in the shape of
Fifty Pounds Sterling;  a very curious product indeed.  Do you
know what I think of doing with it?  _Dyspepsia,_ my constant
attendant in London, is incapable of help in my case by any
medicine or appliance except one only, Riding on horseback.  With
a good horse to whirl me over the world for two hours daily, I
used to keep myself supportably well.  Here, the maintenance of a
Horse far transcends my means;  yet it seems hard I should not
for a little while be in a kind of approximate health in this
Babylon where I have my bread to seek it is like swimming with a
millstone round your neck,--ah me!  In brief, I am about half
resolved to buy myself a sharp little nag with Twenty of these
Transatlantic Pounds, and ride him till the other Thirty be
eaten:  I will call the creature "Yankee," and kind thoughts of
those far away shall be with me every time I mount him.  Will not
that do?  My Wife says it is the best plan I have had for years,
and strongly urges it on.  My kind friends!

As to those copies of the Carlyle Miscellanies, I unfortunately
still can say nothing, except what was said in the former
(Scotch) letter, that you must proceed in the business with an
eye to America and not to us.  My Booksellers, Saunders and
Ottley, have no money for me, no definite offer in money to make
for those Two Hundred copies, of which you seem likely to make
money if we simply leave them alone.  I have asked these
Booksellers, I have asked Fraser too:  What will you _give me in
ready money_ for Two Hundred and Fifty copies of that work, sell
it afterwards as you can?  They answer always, We must see it
first.  Now the copy long ago sent me has never come to hand;  I
have asked for it of Kennet, but without success;  I have nothing
for it but to wait the winds and chances.  Meanwhile Saunders and
Ottley want forsooth a _Sketches of German Literature_ in three
volumes:  then a _Miscellanies_ in three volumes:  that is their
plan of publishing an English edition;  and the outlook they hold
out for me is certain trouble in this matter, and recompense
entirely uncertain.  I think on the whole it is extremely likely
I shall apply to you for Two Hundred and Fifty copies (that is
their favorite number) of these four volumes, (nay, if it be of
any moment, you can bind me down to it _now,_ and take it for
sure,) but I cannot yet send you the title-page;  no bookseller
purchasing till "we see it first."  But after all, will it suit
America to print an _unequal_ number of your two pairs of
volumes?  Do not the two together make one work?  On the whole,
consider that I shall in all likelihood want Two Hundred and
Fifty copies, and consider it certain if that will serve the
enterprise:  we must leave it here today.  I will stir in it
now, however, and take no rest till in one way or other you do
get a title-page from me, or some definite deliverance on the
matter.  O Athenians, what a trouble I _give,_ having _got_
your applauses!

Kennet the Bookseller gave me yesterday (on my way to "the City"
with that Brother of mine, the Italian Doctor who is here at
present and a great lover of yours) ten copies of your Dartmouth
Oration:  we read it over dinner in a chop-house in Bucklersbury,
amid the clatter of some fifty stand of knives and forks;  and a
second time more leisurely at Chelsea here.  A right brave
Speech;  announcing, in its own way, with emphasis of full
conviction, to all whom it may concern, that great forgotten
truth, _Man is still man._  May it awaken a pulsation under the
ribs of Death!  I believe the time is come for such a Gospel.
They must speak it out who have it,--with what audience there may
be.  I have given away two copies this morning;  I will take care
of the rest.  Go on, and speed.--And now where is the heterodox
Divinity one, which awakens such "tempest in a washbowl," brings
Goethe, Transcendentalism, and Carlyle into question, and on the
whole evinces "what [difference] New England also makes between
_Pan_-theism and _Pot_-theism"?  I long to see that;  I expect to
congratulate you on that too.  Meanwhile we will let the washbowl
storm itself out;  and Emerson at Concord shall recognize it for
a washbowl storming, and hold on his way.  As to my share in it,
grieve not for half an instant.  Pantheism, Pottheism, Mydoxy,
Thydoxy, are nothing at all to me;  a weariness the whole jargon,
which I avoid speaking of, decline listening to:  _Live,_ for
God's sake, with what Faith thou couldst get;  leave off
_speaking_ about Faith!  Thou knowest it not.  Be _silent,_ do
not speak.--As to you, my friend, you are even to go on, giving
still harder shocks if need be;  and should I come into censure
by means of you, there or here, think that I am proud of my
company;  that, as the boy Hazlitt said after hearing Coleridge,
"I will go with that man";  or, as our wild Burns has it,

    "Wi' sic as he, where'er he be,
     May I be saved or damned!"

Oime! what a foolish goose of a world this is!  If it were not
[for] here and there an articulate-speaking man, one would be
all-too lonely.

This is nothing at all like the letter I meant to write you;  but
I will write again, I trust, in few days, and the first paragraph
shall, if possible, hold all the business.  I have much to tell
you, which perhaps is as well not written.  O that I did see you
face to face!  But the time shall come, if Heaven will.  Why not
you come over, since I cannot?  There is a room here, there is
welcome here, and two friends always.  It must be done one way or
the other.  I will take, care of your messages to Sterling.  He
is in Florence;  he was the Author of _Montaigne._  The _Foreign
Quarterly_ Reviewer of _Strauss_ I take to be one Blackie, an
Advocate in Edinburgh, a frothy, semi-confused disciple of mine
and other men's;  I guess this, but I have not read the Article:
the man Blackie is from Aberdeen, has been roaming over Europe,
and carries more sail than ballast.  Brother John, spoken of
above, is knocking at the door even now;  he is for Italy again,
we expect, in few days, on a better appointment:  know that you
have a third friend in him under this roof,--a man who quarrels
with me all day in a small way, and loves me with the whole soul
of him.  My Wife demanded to have "room for one line."  What she
is to write I know not, except it be what she has said, holding
up the pamphlet, "Is it not a noble thing?  None of them all but
he," &c., &c.  I will write again without delay when the stray
volumes arrive;  before that if they linger.  Commend me to all
the kind household of Concord:  Wife, Mother, and Son.

Ever yours,
T. Carlyle

_"Forgotten you?"_  O, no indeed!  If there were nothing else to
remember you by, I should never forget the Visitor, who years ago
in the Desert descended on us, out of the clouds as it were, and
made one day there look like enchantment for us, and left me
weeping that it was only _one_ day.  When I think of America, it
is of you,--neither Harriet Martineau nor any one else succeeds
in giving me a more extended idea of it.  When I wish to see
America it is still you, and those that are yours.  I read all
that you write with an interest which I feel in no other writing
but my Husband's,--or it were nearer the truth to say there is no
other writing of living men but yours and his that I _can_ read.
God Bless you and Weib and Kind.  Surely I shall some day see you
all.

Your affectionate
Jane Carlyle




XXX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Hardly above a week ago, I wrote you in immediate
answer to some friendly inquiries produced by negligence of mine:
the Letter is probably tumbling on the salt waves at this hour,
in the belly of the "Great Western";  or perhaps it may be still
on firm land waiting, in which case this will go along with it.
I had written before out of Scotland a Letter of mere
acknowledgment and postponement;  you must have received that
before now, I imagine.  Our small piece of business is now become
articulate, and I will despatch it in a paragraph.  Pity my
stupidity that I did not put the thing on this footing long ago!
It never struck me till the other day that though no copy of our
_Miscellanies_ would turn up for inspection here, and no
Bookseller would bargain for a thing unseen, I myself might
bargain, and leave their hesitations resting on their own
basis.  In fine, I have rejected all their schemes of printing
_Miscellaneous Works_ here, printing _Sketches of German
Literature,_ or printing anything whatever on the "half-profits
system," which is like toilsomely scattering seed into the sea:
and I settled yesterday with Fraser to give him the American
sheets, and let them sell _themselves,_ on clear principles, or
remain unsold if they like.  I find it infinitely the best plan,
and to all appearance the profitablest as to money that could
have been devised for me.

What you have to do therefore is to get Two Hundred and Fifty
copies (_in sheets_) of the whole Four Volumes, so soon as the
second two are printed, and have them, with the proper title-
page, sent off hither to Fraser's address;  the sooner the
better.  The American title-page, instead of "Boston," &c. at the
bottom, will require to bear, in three lines "London: / James
Fraser, 215 Regent Street, / 1839."  Fraser is anxious that you
should not spell him with a z;  your man can look on the Magazine
and beware.  I suppose also you should print _labels_ for the
backs of the four volumes, to be used by the _half_-binder;  they
do the books in that way here now:  but if it occasion any
difficulty, never mind this;  it was not spoken of to Fraser, and
is my own conjecture merely;  the thing can be managed in various
other ways.  Two Hundred and Fifty copies, then, of the entire
book:  there is nothing else to be attended to that you do not
understand as well as I.  Fraser will announce it in his
Magazine:  the eager, select public will wait.  Probably, there
is no chance before the middle of March or so?  Do not hurry
yourselves, or at all change your rate for _us:_  but so soon as
the work is ready in the course of Nature, the earliest
conveyance to the Port of London will bring a little cargo which
one will welcome with a strange feeling!  I declare myself
delighted with the plan;  an altogether romantic kind of plan, of
romance and reality:  fancy me riding on _Yankee_ withal, at the
time, and considering what a curious world this is, that bakes
bread for one beyond the great Ocean-stream, and how a poor man
is not left after all to be trodden into the gutters, though the
fight went sore against him, and he saw no backing anywhere.
_Allah akbar!_ God is great;  no saying truer than that.--And so
now, by the blessing of Heaven, we will talk no more of business
this day.

My employments, my outlooks, condition, and history here, were a
long chapter;  on which I could like so well to talk with you
face to face;  but as for writing of them, it is a mere mockery.
In these four years, so full of pain and toil, I seem to have
lived four decades.  By degrees, the creature gets accustomed to
its element;  the salamander learns to live in fire, and be
of the same temperature with it.  Ah me! I feel as if grown
old innumerable things are become weary, flat, stale, and
unprofitable.  And yet perhaps I am not old, only wearied, and
there is a stroke or two of work in me yet.  For the rest, the
fret and agitation of this Babylon wears me down:  it is the most
unspeakable life;  of sunbeams and miry clay;  a contradiction
which no head can reconcile.  Pain and poverty are not wholesome;
but praise and flattery along with them are poison:  God deliver
us from that;  it carries madness in the very breath of it!  On
the whole, I say to myself, what thing is there so good as
_rest?_  A sad case it is and a frequent one in my circle, to be
entirely cherubic, _all_ face and wings.  "Mes enfans," said a
French gentleman to the cherubs in the Picture, "Mes enfans,
asseyez-vous?"--"Monseigneur," answer they, "il n'y a pas de
quoi!"  I rejoice rather in my laziness;  proving that I _can_
sit.--But, after all, ought I not to be thankful?  I positively
can, in some sort, exist here for the while;  a thing I had been
for many years ambitious of to no purpose.  I shall have to
lecture again in spring, Heaven knows on what;  it will be a
wretched fever for me;  but once through it there will be board
wages for another year.  The wild Ishmael can hunt in _this_
desert too, it would seem.  I say, I will be thankful;  and wait
quietly what farther is to come, or whether anything farther.
But indeed, to speak candidly, I do feel sometimes as if another
Book were growing in me,--though I almost tremble to think of it.
Not for this winter, O no!  I will write an Article merely, or
some such thing, and read trash if better be not.  This, I do
believe, is my horoscope for the next season:  an Article on
something about New-Year's-day (the Westminster Editor, a good-
natured, admiring swan-goose from the North Country, will not let
me rest);  then Lectures;  then--what?  I am for some practical
subject too;  none of your pictures in the air, or _aesthetisches
Zeug_ (as Mullner's wife called it, Mullner of the _Midnight
Blade_):  nay, I cannot get up the steam on any such best;  it is
extremely irksome as well as fruitless at present.  In the next
_Westminster Review,_ therefore, if you see a small scrub of a
paper signed "S.P." on one Varnhagen a German, say that it is by
"Simon Pure," or by "Scissars and Paste," or even by "Soaped
Pig"--whom no man shall _catch!_  Truly it is a secret which you
must not mention:  I was driven to it by the Swan-goose above
mentioned, not Mill but another.  Let this suffice for my
winter's history:  may the summer be more productive.

As for Concord and New England, alas! my Friend, I should but
deface your Idyllion with an ugly contradiction, did I come in
such mood as mine is.  I am older in years than you;  but in
humor I am older by centuries.  What a hope is in that ever young
heart, cheerful, healthful as the morning!  And as for me, you
have no conception what a crabbed, sulky piece of sorrow and
dyspepsia I am grown;  and growing, if I do not draw bridle.  Let
me gather heart a little!  I have not forgotten Concord or the
West;  no, it lies always beautiful in the blue of the horizon,
afar off and yet attainable;  it is a great possession to me;
should it even never be attained.  But I have got to consider
lately that it is you who are coming hither first.  That is the
right way, is it not?  New England is becoming more than ever
part of Old England;  why, you are nearer to us now than
Yorkshire was a hundred years ago;  this is literally a fact:
you can come _without_ making your will.  It is one of my
calculations that all Englishmen from all zones and hemispheres
will, for a good while yet, resort occasionally to the Mother-
Babel, and see a thing or two there.  Come if you dare;  I said
there was a room, house-room and heart-room, constantly waiting
you here, and you shall see blockheads by the million.
_Pickwick_ himself shall be visible;  innocent young Dickens
reserved for a questionable fate.  The great Wordsworth shall
talk till you yourself pronounce him to be a bore.  Southey's
complexion is still healthy mahogany-brown, with a fleece of
white hair, and eyes that seem running at full gallop.  Leigh
Hunt, "man of genius in the shape of a Cockney," is my near
neighbor, full of quips and cranks, with good humor and no common
sense.  Old Rogers with his pale head, white, bare, and cold as
snow, will work on you with those large blue eyes, cruel,
sorrowful, and that sardonic shelf-chin:--This is the Man, O
Rogers, that wrote the German Poetry in American Prose;  consider
him well!--But whither am I running?  My sheet is done!  My
Brother John returns again almost immediately to Italy.  He has
got appointed Traveling Doctor to a certain Duke of Buccleuch,
the chief of our Scotch Dukes:  an excellent position for him as
far as externals go.  His departure will leave me lonelier;  but
I must reckon it for the best:  especially I must begin working.
Harriet Martineau is coming hither this evening;  with beautiful
enthusiasm for the Blacks and others.  She is writing a Novel.
The first American book proved generally rather wearisome, the
second not so;  we have since been taught (not I) "How to
observe."  Suppose you and I promulgate a treatise next, "How to
see"?  The old plan was, to have a pair of _eyes _first of all,
and then to open them:  and endeavor with your whole strength to
_look._  The good Harriet!  But "God," as the Arabs say, "has
given to every people a Prophet (or Poet) in its own speech":
and behold now Unitarian mechanical Formalism was to have its
Poetess too;  and stragglings of genius were to spring up even
through that like grass through a Macadam highway!--Adieu, my
Friend, I wait still for your heterodox Speech;  and love
you always.

T. Carlyle

An English _Sartor_ goes off to you this day;  through Kennet, to
C.C. Little and J. Brown of Boston;  the likeliest conveyance.
It is correctly printed, and that is all.  Its fate here (the
fate of the publication, I mean) remains unknown;  "unknown
and unimportant."




XXXI. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Almost the very day after my last Letter went
off, the long-expected two volumes of _Miscellanies_ arrived.
The heterodox pamphlet has never yet come to hand.  I am now to
write you again about that _Miscellany_ concern the fourth
letter, I do believe;  but it is confirmatory of the foregoing
three, and will be the last, we may hope.

Fraser is charmed with the look of your two volumes;  declares
them unsurpassable by art of his;  and wishes (what is the main
part of this message) that you would send his cargo in the
_bound_ state, bound and lettered as these are, with the sole
difference that the leaves be _not_ cut, or shaved on the sides,
our English fashion being to have them _rough._  He is impatient
that the Book were here;  desires further that it be sent to the
Port of London rather than another Port, and that it be packed in
_boxes_ "to keep the covers of the volumes safe,"--all which I
doubt not the Packers and the Shippers of New England have
dexterity enough to manage for the best, without desire of his.
If you have printed off nothing yet, I will desire for my own
behoof that Two hundred and _Sixty_ be the number sent;  I find I
shall need some ten to give away:  if your first sheet is printed
off, let the number stand as it was.  It would be an improvement
if you could print our title-pages on paper a little stronger;
that would stand ink, I mean:  the fly leaves in the same, if you
have such paper convenient;  if not, not.  Farther as to the
matter of the title-page, it seems to me your Printer might
give a bolder and a broader type to the words "Critical and
Miscellaneous," and add after "Essays" with a colon (:), the
line "Collected and Republished," with a colon also;  then the
"By," &c. "In Four Volumes, Vol. I.," &c.  I mean that we want,
in general, a little more ink and decisiveness:  show your man
the title-page of the English _French Revolution,_ or look at it
your self, and you will know.  R.W.E.'s "Advertisement," friendly
and good, as all his dealings are to me ward, will of course be
suppressed in the English copies.  I see not that with propriety
I can say anything by way of substitute:  silence and the New
England _imprint_ will tell the story as eloquently as there
is need.

For the rest you must tell Mr. Loring, and all men who had a hand
in it along with you, that I am altogether right well pleased
with this edition, and find it far beyond my expectation.  To my
two young Friends, Henry S. McKean (be so good as write these
names more indisputably for me) and Charles Stearns Wheeler, in
particular, I will beg you to express emphatically my gratitude;
they have stood by me with right faithfulness, and made the
correctest printing;  a _great_ service had I known that there
were such eyes and heads acting in behalf of me there, I would
have scraped out the Editorial blotches too (notes of admiration,
dashes, "We think"s, &c., &c., common in Jeffrey's time in the
_Edinburgh Review_) and London misprints;  which are almost the
only deformities that remain now.  It is _extremely_ correct
printing wherever I have looked, and many things are silently
amended;  it is the most fundamental service of all.  I have not
the other _Articles_ by me at present;  I think they are of
themselves a little more correct;  at all events there are
nothing but _misprints_ to deal with;--the Editors, by this time,
had got bound up to let me alone.  In the _Life of Scott,_ fourth
page of it (p. 296 of our edition), there is a sentence to be
deleted.  "It will tell us, say they, little new and nothing
pleasing to know":  out with this, for it is nonsense, and was
marked for erasure in the manuscript, I dare say.  I know with
certainty no more at present.

Fraser is to sell the Four Volumes at Two Guineas here.  On
studying accurately your program of the American mercantile
method, I stood amazed to contrast it with our English one.  The
Bookseller here admits that he could, by diligent bargaining, get
up such a book for something like the same cost or a _little_
more;  but the "laws of the trade" deduct from the very front of
the selling price--how much think you--_forty percent_ and odd,
when your man has only _fifteen;_  for the mere act of vending!
To cover all, they charge that enormous price.  (A man, while I
stood consulting with Fraser, came in and asked for Carlyle's
_Revolution;_  they showed it him, he asked the price;  and
exclaimed, "Guinea and a half!  I can get it from America for
nine shillings!" and indignantly went his way;  not without
reason.)  There are "laws of the trade" which ought to be
_repealed;_  which I will take the liberty of contravening to all
lengths by all opportunities--if I had but the power!  But if
this joint-stock American plan prosper, it will answer rarely.
Fraser's first _French Revolution,_ for instance, will be done,
he calculates, about New-Year's-day;  and a second edition
wanted;  mine to do with what I like.  If you in America
wanted more also--?  I leave you to think of this.--And now
enough, enough!

My Brother went from us last Tuesday;  ought to be in Paris
yesterday.  I am yet writing nothing;  feel forsaken, sad, sick,
--not unhappy.  In general Death seems beautiful to me;  sweet and
great.  But Life also is beautiful, is great and divine, were it
never to be joyful any more.  I read Books, my wife sewing by me,
with the light of a sinumbra, in a little apartment made snug
against the winter;  and am happiest when all men leave me alone,
or nearly all,--though many men love me rather, ungrateful that I
am.  My present book is _Horace Walpole;_  I get endless stuff
out of it;  epic, tragic, lyrical, didactic:  all inarticulate
indeed.  An old blind Schoolmaster in Annan used to ask with
endless anxiety when a new scholar was offered him, "But are ye
sure _he's not a Dunce?_"  It is really the one thing needful in
a man;  for indeed (if we will candidly understand it) all else
is presupposed in that.  Horace Walpole is no dunce, not a fibre
of him is duncish.

Your Friend Sumner was here yesterday, a good while, for the
first time:  an ingenious, cultivated, courteous man;  a little
sensitive or so, and with no other fault that I discerned.  He
borrowed my copy of your Dartmouth business, and bound himself
over to return with it soon.  Some approve of that here, some
condemn:  my Wife and another lady call it better even than the
former, I not so good.  And now the Heterodox, the Heterodox,
where is that?  Adieu, my dear Friend.  Commend me to the Concord
Household;  to the little Boy, to his Grandmother, and Mother,
and Father;  we must all meet some day,--or _some no-day_ then
(as it shall please God)!  My Wife heartily greets you all.

Ever yours,
T. Carlyle

I sent your book, message, and address to Sterling;  he is in
Florence or Rome.  Read the article _Simonides_ by him in the
_London and Westminster_--brilliant prose, translations--wooden?
His signature is L (Pounds Sterling!).--_Now_ you are to write
_soon?_  I always forgot to tell you, there came long since two
packages evidently in your hand, marked "One printed sheet," and
"one Newspaper," for which the Postman demanded about Fifteen
shillings:  _rejected._  After considerable correspondence the
Newspaper was again offered me at _ten pence;_  the _sheet_
unattainable altogether:  "No," even at tenpence.  The fact is,
it was wrong wrapped, that Newspaper.  Leave it open at the ends,
and try me again, once;  I think it will come almost gratis.
Steam and Iron are making all the Planet into one Village.--A Mr.
Dwight wrote to me about the dedicating of some German
translations:  _Yes._  What are they or he?--Your _Sartor_ is
off through Kennet.  Could you send me two copies of the American
_Life of Schiller,_ if the thing is fit for making a present of,
and easy to be got?  If not, do not mind it at all.--Addio!


XXXII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I am not now in any Condition to write a letter,
having neither the facts from the booksellers which you would
know touching our future plans, nor yet a satisfactory account
balanced and settled of our past dealings;  and lastly, no time
to write what I would say,--as my poor lectures are in full
course, and absorb all my wits;  but as the "Royal William" will
not wait, and as I have a hundred pounds to send on account of
the sales of the _French Revolution,_ I must steal a few minutes
to send my salutation.  I have received all your four good
letters:  and you are a good and generous man to write so many.
Two came on the 2d and 3d of January, and the last on the 9th.
If the bookselling Munroe had answered me yesterday, as he ought,
I should be able to satisfy you as to the time when to expect our
cargo of _Miscellanies._  The third and fourth volumes are now
printing:  't is a fortnight since we began.  You shall have two
hundred and fifty copies,--I am not quite sure you can have
more,--bound, and _entitled,_ and directed as you desire, at
least according to the best ability of our printer as far as the
typography is concerned, and we will speed the work as fast as we
can;  but as we have but a single copy of _Fraser's Magazine_--we
do not get on rapidly.  The _French Revolution_ was all sold more
than a month since.  We should be glad of more copies, but the
bookseller thinks not of enough copies to justify a new edition
yet.  I should not be surprised, however, to see that some bold
brother of the trade had undertaken it.  Now, what does your
question point at in reference to your new edition, asking "if we
want more"?  Could you send us out a part of your edition at
American prices, and at the same time to your advantage?  I wish
I knew the precise answer to this question, then perhaps I could
keep all pirates out of our bay.

I shall convey in two days your message to Stearns Wheeler, who
is now busy in correcting the new volumes.  He is now Greek Tutor
in Harvard College.--Kindest thanks to Jane Carlyle for her
generous remembrances, which I will study to deserve.  Has the
heterodoxy arrived in Chelsea, and quite destroyed us even in the
charity of our friend?  I am sorry to have worried you so often
about the summer letter.  Now am I your debtor four times.  The
parish commotion, too, has long ago subsided here, and my course
of Lectures on "Human Life" finds a full attendance.  I wait for
the coming of the _Westminster,_ which has not quite yet
arrived here, though I have seen the London advertisement.  It
sounds prosperously in my ear what you say of Dr. Carlyle's
appointments.  I was once very near the man in Rome, but did not
see him.  I will atone as soon as I can for this truncated
epistle.  You must answer it immediately, so far as to
acknowledge the receipt of the enclosed bill of exchange, and
soon I will send you the long promised _account_ of the _French
Revolution,_ and also such moral account of the same as is
over due.

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




XXXIII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Friend,--Your welcome little Letter, with the astonishing
inclosure, arrived safe four days ago;  right welcome, as all
your Letters are, and bringing as these usually do the best news
I get here.  The miraculous draught of Paper I have just sent to
a sure hand in Liverpool, there to lie till in due time it have
ripened into a crop of a hundred gold sovereigns!  On this
subject, which gives room for so many thoughts, there is little
that can be said, that were not an impertinence more or less.
The matter grows serious to me, enjoins me to be silent and
reflect.  I will say, at any rate, there never came money into my
hands I was so proud of;  the promise of a blessing looks from
the face of it;  nay, it _will_ be _twice_ blessed.  So I will
ejaculate, with the Arabs, _Allah akbar!_ and walk silent by the
shore of the many-sounding Babel-tumult, meditating on much.
Thanks to the mysterious all-bounteous Guide of men, and to you
my true Brother, far over the sea!--For the rest, I showed Fraser
this Nehemiah document, and said I hoped he would blush very
deep;--which indeed the poor creature did, till I was absolutely
sorry for him.

But now first as to this question, What I mean?  You must know
poor Fraser, a punctual but most pusillanimous mortal, has been
talking louder and louder lately of a "second edition" here;
whereupon, as labor-wages are not higher here than with you, and
printing-work, if well bargained for, ought to be about the same
price, it struck me that, as in the case of the _Miscellanies,_
so here inversely the supply of both the New and the Old England
might be profitably combined.  Whether aught can come of this,
now that it is got close upon us, I yet know not.  Fraser has
only seventy-five copies left;  but when these will be done his
prophecy comprehends not,--"surely within the year"!  For the
present I have set him to ascertain, and will otherwise ascertain
for myself, what the exact cost of _stereotyping_ the Book were,
in the same letter and style as yours;  it is not so much more
than printing, they tell me:  I should then have done with it
forever and a day.  You on your side, and we on ours, might have
as many copies as were wanted for all time coming.  This is, in
these very days, under inquisition;  but there are many points to
be settled before the issue.

I have not yet succeeded in finding a Bookseller of any fitness,
but am waiting for one always.  And even had I found such a one,
I mean an energetic seller that would sell on other terms than
forty percent for his trouble, it were still a question whether
one ought to venture on such a speculation:  "quitting the old
highways," as I say, "in indignation at the excessive tolls, with
hope that you will arrive cheaper in the steeple-chase way!"  It
is clear, however, that said highways are of the corduroy sort,
said tolls an anomaly that must be remedied soon;  and also that
in all England there is no Book in a likelier case to adventure
it with than this same,--which did not sell at all for two
months, as I hear, which all Booksellers got terrified for, and
which has crept along mainly by its own gravitation ever since.
We will consider well, we shall see.  You can understand that
such a thing, for your market too, is in agitation;  if any
pirate step in before us in the meanwhile, we cannot help it.

Thanks again for your swift attention to the _Miscellanies;_
poor Fraser is in great haste to see them;  hoping for his forty-
per-cent division of the spoil.  If you have not yet got to the
very end with your printing, I will add a few errata;  if they
come too late, never mind;  they are of small moment....

This foggy Babylon tumbles along as it was wont;  and, as for my
particular case, uses me not worse, but better, than of old.
Nay, there are many in it that have a real friendliness for me.
For example, the other night, a massive portmanteau of Books,
sent according to my written list, from the Cambridge University
Library, from certain friends there whom I have never seen;  a
gratifying arrival.  For we have no Library here, from which we
can borrow books home;  and are only in these weeks striving to
get one:  think of that!  The worst is the sore tear and wear of
this huge roaring Niagara of things on such a poor excitable set
of nerves as mine.  The velocity of all things, of the very word
you hear on the streets, is at railway rate:  joy itself is
unenjoyable, to be avoided like pain;  there is no wish one has
so pressing as for quiet.  Ah me! I often swear I will be buried
at least in free breezy Scotland, out of this insane hubbub,
where Fate tethers me in life!  If Fate always tether me;--but if
ever the smallest competence of worldly means be mine, I will fly
this whirlpool as I would the Lake of _Malebolge,_ and only visit
it now and then!  Yet perhaps it is the proper place after all,
seeing all places are improper:  who knows?  Meanwhile I lead a
most dyspeptic, solitary, self-shrouded life:  consuming, if
possible in silence, my considerable daily allotment of pain;
glad when any strength is left in me for working, which is the
only use I can see   in myself,--too rare a case of late.  The
ground of my existence is black as Death;  too black, when all
void too but at times there paint themselves on it pictures of
gold and rainbow and lightning;  all the brighter for the black
ground, I suppose.  Withal I am very much of a fool.--Some people
will have me write on _Cromwell,_ which I have been talking
about.  I do read on that and English subjects, finding that I
know nothing and that nobody knows anything of that:  but whether
anything will come of it remains to be seen.  Mill, the
_Westminster_ friend, is gone in bad health to the Continent, and
has left a rude Aberdeen Longear, a great admirer of mine too,
with whom I conjecture I cannot act at all:  so good-bye to that.
The wisest of all, I do believe, were that I bought my nag
_Yankee_ and set to galloping about the elevated places here!  A
certain Mr. Coolidge, a Boston man of clear iron visage and
character, came down to me the other day with Sumner;  he left
a newspaper fragment, containing "the Socinian Pope's denunciation
of Emerson."

The thing denounced had not then arrived, though often asked for
at Kennet's;  it did not arrive till yesterday, but had lain buried
in bales of I know not what.  We have read it only once, and are
not yet at the bottom of it.  Meanwhile, as I judge, the Socinian
"tempest in a washbowl" is all according to nature, and will be
profitable to you, not hurtful.  A man is called to let his light
shine before men;  but he ought to understand better and better
what medium it is through, what retinas it falls on:  wherefore
look _there._  I find in this, as in the two other Speeches, that
noblest self-assertion, and believing originality, which is like
sacred fire, the _beginning_ of whatsoever is to flame and work;
and for young men especially one sees not what could be more
vivifying.  Speak, therefore, while you feel called to do it;
and when you feel called.  But for yourself, my friend, I
prophesy it will not do always:  a faculty is in you for a _sort_
of speech which is itself _action,_ an artistic sort.  You _tell_
us with piercing emphasis that man's soul is great;  _show_ us a
great soul of a man, in some work symbolic of such:  this is the
seal of such a message, and you will feel by and by that you are
called to this.  I long to see some concrete Thing, some Event,
Man's Life, American Forest, or piece of Creation, which this
Emerson loves and wonders at, well _Emersonized,_ depictured by
Emerson, filled with the life of Emerson, and cast forth from him
then to live by itself.  If these Orations balk me of this, how
profitable soever they be for others.  I will not love them.--And
yet, what am I saying?  How do I know what is good for _you,_
what authentically makes your own heart glad to work in it?  I
speak from _without,_ the friendliest voice must speak from
without;  and a man's ultimate monition comes only from _within._
Forgive me, and love me, and write soon.  _A Dieu!_

T. Carlyle

My Wife, very proud of your salutation, sends a sick return of
greeting.  After a winter of unusual strength, she took cold the
other day, and coughs again;  though she will not call it serious
yet.  One likes none of these things.  She has a brisk heart and
a stout, but too weak a frame for this rough life of mine.  I
will not get sad about it.

One of the strangest things about these New England Orations is a
fact I have heard, but not yet seen, that a certain W. Gladstone,
an Oxford crack Scholar, Tory M.P., and devout Churchman of great
talent and hope, has contrived to insert a piece of you (_first_
Oration it must be) in a work of his on _Church and State,_ which
makes some figure at present!  I know him for a solid, serious,
silent-minded man;  but how with his Coleridge Shovel-Hattism he
has contrived to relate himself to _you,_ there is the mystery.
True men of all creeds, it _would_ seem, are Brothers.

To write soon!




XXXIV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I will spare you my apologies for not writing,
they are so many.  You have been very generous, I very promising
and dilatory.  I desired to send you an Account of the sales of
the _History,_ thinking that the details might be more
intelligible to you than to me, and might give you some insight
into literary and social, as well as bibliopolical relations.
But many details of this account will not yet settle themselves
into sure facts, but do dance and mystify me as one green in
ledgers.  Bookseller says nine hundred and ninety-one copies came
from Binder, nine remaining imperfect, and so not bound.  But in
all my reckonings of the particulars of distribution I make
either more or less than nine hundred and ninety-one copies.  And
some of my accounts are with private individuals at a distance,
and they have their uncertainties and misrememberings also.  But
the facts will soon show themselves, and I count confidently on a
small balance against the world to your credit.

The _Miscellanies_ go forward too slowly, at about the rate of
seventy-two pages a week, as I understand.  Of the _Fraser_
articles and of some others we have but a single copy, (such are
the tough limits of some English immortalities and editorial
renowns,) but we expect the end of the printing in six weeks.
The first two volumes, with title-pages, are gone to the binder--
two hundred and sixty copies--with strait directions;  and I
presume will go to sea very soon.  We shall send the last two
volumes by a later ship.  You will pay nothing for the books
we send except freight.  We shall deduct the cost of the
books from the credit side of your account here.  We print
of the second series twelve hundred and fifty copies, with the
intention of printing a second edition of the first series of
five hundred, if we see fit hereafter to supply the place of the
emigrating portion of the first.  You express some surprise at
the cheapness of our work.  The publishers, I believe, generally
get more profits.  They grumbled a little at the face of the
account on the 1st of January;  so in the new contract for the
new volumes I have allowed them nine cents more on each copy sold
by them.  So that you should receive ninety-one cents on a copy
instead of one dollar.  When the two hundred and fifty copies of
our first two volumes are gone to you, I think they will have but
about one hundred copies more to sell.

Your books are read.  I hear, I think, more gratitude expressed
for the _Miscellanies_ than for the _History._  Young men at all
our colleges study them in closets, and the Copernican is
eradicating the Ptolemaic lore.  I have frequent and cordial
testimonies to the good working of the leaven, and continual
inquiry whether the man will come hither.  _Speriamo._

I was a fool to tell you once you must not come if I did tell you
so.  I knew better at the time, and did steadily believe, as far
as I was concerned, that no polemical mud, however much was
thrown, could by any possibility stick to me;  for I was purely
an observer;  had not the smallest personal or _partial_
interest;  and merely spoke to the question as a historian;  and
I knew whoever could see me must see that.  But, at the moment,
the little pamphlet made much stir and excitement in the
newspapers;  and the whole thousand copies were bought up.  The
ill wind has blown over.  I advertised, as usual, my winter
course of Lectures, and it prospered very well.  Ten Lectures:
I. Doctrine of the Soul;  II. Home;  III. The School;  IV. Love;
V. Genius;  VI. The Protest;  VII. Tragedy;  VIII. Comedy;  IX.
Duty;  X. Demonology.  I designed to add two more, but my lungs
played me false with unseasonable inflammation, so I discoursed
no more on "Human Life."  Now I am well again.--But, as I said,
as I could not hurt myself, it was foolish to flatter myself that
I could mix your cause with mine and hurt you.  Nothing is more
certain than that you shall have all our ears, whenever you wish
for them, and free from that partial position which I deprecated.
Yet I cannot regret my letter, which procured me so affectionate
and magnanimous a reply.

Thanks, too, for your friendliest invitation.  But I have a new
reason why I should not come to England,--a blessed babe, named
Ellen, almost three weeks old,--a little, fair, soft lump of
contented humanity, incessantly sleeping, and with an air of
incurious security that says she has come to stay, has come to be
loved, which has nothing mean, and quite piques me.

Yet how gladly should I be near you for a time.  The months and
years make me more desirous of an unlimited conversation with
you;  and one day, I think, the God will grant it, after whatever
way is best.  I am lately taken with _The Onyx Ring,_ which
seemed to me full of knowledge, and good, bold, true drawing.
Very saucy, was it not? in John Sterling to paint Collins;  and
what intrepid iconoclasm in this new Alcibiades to break in among
your Lares and disfigure your sacred Hermes himself in
Walsingham.  To me, a profane man, it was good sport to see the
Olympic lover of Frederica, Lili, and so forth, lampooned.  And
by Alcibiades too, over whom the wrath of Pericles must pause and
brood ere it falls.  I delight in this Sterling, but now that I
know him better I shall no longer expect him to write to me.  I
wish I could talk to you on the grave questions, graver than all
literature, which the trifles of each day open.  Our doing seems
to be a gaudy screen or popinjay to divert the eye from our
nondoing.  I wish, too, you could know my friends here.  A man
named Bronson Alcott is a majestic soul, with whom conversation
is possible.  He is capable of truth, and gives me the same glad
astonishment that he should exist which the world does.

As I hear not yet of your reception of the bill of exchange,
which went by the "Royal William" in January, I enclose the
duplicate.  And now all success to the Lectures of April or May!
A new Kingdom with new extravagances of power and splendor I
know.  Unless you can keep your own secret better in _Rahel,_
&c., you must not give it me to keep.  The London _Sartor_
arrived in my hands March 5th, dated the 15th of November, so
long is the way from Kennet to Little & Co.  The book is welcome,
and awakens a sort of nepotism in me,--my brother's child.

R.W. Emerson

I rejoice in the good accounts you give me of your household;  in
your wife's health;  in your brother's position.  My wife wishes
to be affectionately remembered to you and yours.  And the lady
must continue to love her _old_ Transatlantic friend.




XXXV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Only last Saturday I despatched a letter to you
containing a duplicate of the bill of exchange sent in January,
and all the facts I knew of our books;  and now comes to me a
note from Wheeler, at Cambridge, saying that the printers, on
reckoning up their amount of copy, find that nowise can they make
450 pages per volume, as they have promised, for these two last
of the _Miscellanies._  They end the third volume with page 390,
and they have not but 350 or less pages for the fourth.  They
ask, What shall be done?  Nothing is known to me but to give them
_Rahel,_ though I grudge it, for I vastly prefer to end with
_Scott._   _Rahel,_ I fancy, cost you no night and no morning,
but was writ in that gentle after-dinner hour so friendly to good
digestion.  Stearns Wheeler dreams that it is possible to draw at
this eleventh hour some possible manuscript out of the unedited
treasures of Teufelsdrockh's cabinets.  If the manuscripts were
ready, all fairly copied out by foreseeing scribes in your
sanctuary at Chelsea, the good goblin of steam would--with the
least waiting, perhaps a few days--bring the packet to our types
in time.  I have little hope, almost none, from a sally so
desperate on possible portfolios;  but neither will I be wanting
to my sanguine co-editor, your good friend.  So I told him I
would give you as instant notice as Mr. Rogers at the Merchants'
Exchange Bar can contrive, and tell you plainly that we shall
proceed to print _Rahel_ when we come so far on;  and with that
paper end;  unless we shall receive some contrary word from you.
And if we can obtain any manuscript from you before we have
actually bound our book, we will cancel our last sheets and
insert it.  And so may the friendly Heaven grant a speedy passage
to my letter and to yours!  I fear the possibility of our success
is still further reduced by the season of the year, as the
Lectures must shortly be on foot.  Well, the best speed to them
also.  When I think of you as speaking and not writing them, I
remember Luther's words, "He that can speak well, the same is
a man."

I hope you liked John Dwight's translations of Goethe, and his
notes.  He is a good, susceptible, yearning soul, not so apt to
create as to receive with the freest allowance, but I like his
books very much.

Do think to say in a letter whether you received _from me_ a copy
of our edition of your _French Revolution._  I ordered a copy
sent to you,--probably wrote your name in it,--but it does not
appear in the bookseller's account.  Farewell.

R.W. Emerson




XXXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Has anything gone wrong with you?  How is it
that you do not write to me?  These three or four weeks, I know
not whether _duly_ or not so long, I have been in daily hope of
some sign from you;  but none comes;  not even a Newspaper,--open
at the ends.  The German Translator, Mr. Dwight, mentioned, at
the end of a Letter I had not long ago, that you had given a
brilliant course of Lectures at Boston, but had been obliged to
_intermit it on account of illness._  Bad news indeed, that
latter clause;  at the same time, it was thrown in so cursorily I
would not let myself be much alarmed;  and since that, various
New England friends have assured me here that there was nothing
of great moment in it, that the business was all well over now,
and you safe at Concord again.  Yet how is it that I do not
hear?  I will tell you my guess is that those Boston Carlylean
_Miscellanies_ are to blame.  The Printer is slack and lazy as
Printers are;  and you do not wish to write till you can send
some news of him?  I will hope and believe that only this is it,
till I hear worse.

I sent you a Dumfries Newspaper the other week, for a sign of my
existence and anxiety.  A certain Mr. Ellis of Boston is this day
packing up a very small memorial of me to your Wife;  a poor
Print rolled about a bit of wood:  let her receive it graciously
in defect of better.  It comes under your address.  Nay, properly
it is my Wife's memorial to your Wife.  It is to be hung up in
the Concord drawing-room.  The two Households, divided by wide
seas, are to understand always that they are united nevertheless.

My special cause for writing this day rather than another is the
old story, book business.  You have brought that upon yourself,
my friend;  and must do the best you can with it.  After all, why
should not Letters be on business too?  Many a kind thought,
uniting man with man, in gratitude and helpfulness, is founded on
business.  The speaker at Dartmouth College seems to think it
ought to be so.  Nor do I dissent.--But the case is this, Fraser
and I are just about bargaining for a second edition of the
_Revolution._  He will print fifteen hundred for the English
market, in a somewhat closer style, and sell them here at twenty-
four shillings a copy.  His first edition is all gone but some
handful;  and the man is in haste, and has taken into a mood of
hope,--for he is weak and aguish, alternating from hot to cold;
otherwise, I find, a very accurate creature, and deals in his
unjust trade as justly as any other will.  He has settled with
me;  his half-profits amount to some L130, which by charging me
for every presentation copy he cuts down to somewhere about L110;
_not_ the lion's share in the gross produce, yet a great share
compared with an expectancy no higher than _zero!_  We continue
on the same system for this second adventure;  I cannot go
hawking about in search of new terms;  I might go farther and
fare worse.  And now comes your part of the affair;  in which I
would fain have had your counsel;  but must ask your help,
proceeding with my own light alone.  After Fraser's fifteen
hundred are printed off, the types remain standing, and I for my
own behoof throw off five hundred more, designed for your market.
Whether five hundred are too many or too few, I can only guess;
if too many, we can retain them here and turn them to account;
if too few, there is no remedy.  At all events, costing me only
the paper and press-work, there is surely no Pirate in the Union
that can _undersell_ us!  Nay, it seems they have a drawback on
our taxed paper, sufficient or nearly so to land the cargo at
Boston without more charge.  You see, therefore, how it is.  Can
you find me a Bookseller, as for yourself;  he and you can fix
what price the ware will carry when you see it.  Meanwhile I must
have his Title-page;  I must have his directions (if any be
needed);  nay, for that matter, you might write a Preface if you
liked,--though I see not what you have to say, and recommend
silence rather!  The book is to be in three volumes duodecimo,
and we will take care it be fit to show its face in your market.
A few errors of the press;  and one correction (about the sinking
of the _Vengeur,_ which I find lately to be an indisputable
falsehood);  these are all the changes.  We are to have done
printing, Fraser predicts, "in two months";--say two and a half!
I suppose you decipher the matter out of this plastering and
smearing;  and will do what is needful in it.  "Great inquiry" is
made for the _Miscellanies,_ Fraser says;  though he suspects it
may perhaps be but one or two men inquiring _often,_--the dog!

I am again upon the threshold of extempore lecturing:  on "the
Revolutions of Modern Europe";  Protestantism, 2 lectures;
Puritanism, 2;  French Revolution, 2.  I almost regret that I had
undertaken the thing this year at all, for I am no longer driven
by Poverty as heretofore.  Nay, I am richer than I have been for
ten years;  and have a kind of prospect, for the first time this
great while, of being allowed to subsist in this world for the
future:  a great blessing, perhaps the greatest, when it comes as
a novelty!  However, I thought it right to keep this Lecture
business open, come what might.  I care less about it than I did;
it is not agony and wretched trembling to the marrow of the bone,
as it was the last two times.  I believe, in spite of all my
perpetual indigestions and nervous woes, I am actually getting
into better health;  the weary heart of me is quieter;  I wait in
silence for the new chapter,--feeling truly that we are at the
end of one period here.  I count it _two_ in my autobiography:
we shall see what the _third_ is;  [if] third there be.  But I am
in small haste for a third.  How true is that of the old
Prophets, "The _word of the Lord_ came unto" such and such a one!
When it does not come, both Prophet and Prosaist ought to be
thankful (after a sort), and rigorously hold their tongue.--Lord
Durham's people have come over with golden reports of the
Americans, and their brotherly feelings.  One Arthur Buller
preaches to me, with emphasis, on a quite personal topic till one
explodes in laughter to hear him, the good soul:  That I, namely,
am the most esteemed, &c., and ought to go over and Lecture in
all great towns of the Union, and make, &c., &c.!  I really do
begin to think of it in this interregnum that I am in.  But then
my Lectures must be written;  but then I must become a _hawker,
--ach Gott!_

The people are beginning to quote you here:  _tant pis pour eux!_
I have found you in two Cambridge books.  A certain Mr. Richard
M. Milnes, M.P., a beautiful little Tory dilettante poet and
politician whom I love much, applied to me for _Nature_ (the
others he has) that he might write upon it.    Somebody has
stolen _Nature_ from me, or many have thumbed it to pieces;  I
could not find a copy.  Send me one, the first chance you have.
And see Miss Martineau in the last _Westminster Review:_--these
things you are old enough to stand?  They are even of benefit?
Emerson is not without a select public, the root of a select
public on this side of the water too.--Popular Sumner is off to
Italy, the most popular of men,--inoffensive, like a worn
sixpence that has no physiognomy left.  We preferred Coolidge to
him in this circle;  a square-cut iron man, yet with clear
symptoms of a heart in him.  Your people will come more and more
to their maternal Babylon, will they not, by the steamers?--
Adieu, my dear friend.  My Wife joins me in all good prayers for
you and yours.

Thomas Carlyle




XXXVII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Friend,--Some four days ago I wrote you a long Letter,
rather expressive of anxiety about you;  it will probably come to
hand along with this.  I had heard vaguely that you were unwell,
and wondered why you did not write.  Happily, that point is as
good as settled now, even by your silence about it.  I have, half
an hour ago, received your Concord Letter of the 19th of March.
The Letter you speak of there as "written last Saturday" has not
yet made its appearance, but may be looked for now shortly:  as
there is no mention here of any mischance, except the shortcoming
of Printers' copy, I infer that all else is in a tolerably
correct state;  I wait patiently for the "last Saturday" tidings,
and will answer as to the matters of copy, in good heart, without
loss of a moment.

There is nothing of the manuscript sort in Teufelsdrockh's
repositories that would suit you well;  nothing at all in a
completed state, except a long rigmarole dissertation (in a
crabbed sardonic vein) about the early history of the Teutonic
Kindred, wriggling itself along not in the best style through
Proverb lore, and I know not what, till it end (if my memory
serve) in a kind of Essay on the _Minnesingers._  It was written
almost ten years ago, and never contented me well.  It formed
part of a lucklessly projected _History of German Literature,_
subsequent portions of which, the _Nibelungen_ and _Reinecke
Fox,_ you have already printed.  The unfortunate "_Cabinet
Library_ Editor," or whatever his title was, broke down;  and I
let him off,--without paying me;  and this alone remains of the
misventure;  a thing not fit for you, nor indeed at bottom for
anybody, though I have never burnt it yet.  My other Manuscripts
are scratchings and scrawlings;--children's _infant_ souls
weeping because they never could be born, but were left there
whimpering _in limine primo!_

On this side, therefore, is no help.  Nevertheless, it seems to
me, otherwise there is.  _Varnhagen_ may be printed I think
without offence, since there is need of it:  if that will make up
your fourth volume to a due size, why not?  It is the last faint
murmur one gives in Periodical Literature, and may indicate the
approach of silence and slumber.  I know no errors of the Press
in _Varnhagen:_  there is one thing about Jean Paul F. Richter's
_want_ of humor in his _speech,_ which somehow I could like to
have the opportunity of uttering a word on, though _what_ word I
see not very well.  My notion is partly that V. overstates the
thing, taking a Berlin _propos de salon_ for a scientifically
accurate record;  and partly farther that the defect (if any) was
_creditable_ to Jean Paul, indicating that he talked from the
abundance of the heart, not burning himself off in miserable
perpetual sputter like a Town-wit, but speaking what he had to
say, were it dull, were it not dull,--for his own satisfaction
first of all!  If you in a line or two could express at the right
point something of that sort, it were well;  yet on the whole, if
not, then is almost no matter.  Let the whole stand then as the
commencement of slumber and stertorous breathing!

Varnhagen himself will not bring up your fourth volume to the
right size;  hardly beyond 380 pages, I should think;  yet what
more can be done?  Do you remember Fraser's Magazine for October,
1832, and a Translation there, with Notes, of a thing called
Goethe's Mahrchen?  It is by me;  I regard it as a most
remarkable piece, well worthy of perusal, especially by all
readers of mine.  The printing of your third volume will of
course be finished before this letter arrive;  nevertheless I
have a plan:  that you (as might be done, I suppose, by
cancelling and reprinting the concluding leaf or leaves) append
the said Translated Tale, in a smaller type, to that volume.  It
is 21 or 22 pages of _Fraser,_ and will perhaps bring yours up to
the mark.  Nay, indeed there are two other little Translations
from Goethe which I reckon good, though of far less interest than
the _Mahrchen;_  I think they are in the Frasers almost
immediately preceding;  one of them is called _Fragment from
Goethe_ (if I remember);  in his _Works,_ it is _Novelle;_  it
treats of a visit by some princely household to a strange
Mountain ruin or castle, and the catastrophe is the escape of a
show-lion from its booth in the neighboring Market-Town.  I have
not the thing here,--alas, sinner that I am, it now strikes me
that the "two other things" are this one thing, which my
treacherous memory is making into two!  This however you will
find in the Number immediately, or not far from immediately,
preceding that of the _Mahrchen;_  along with which, in the same
type with which, it would give us letter-press enough.  It ought
to stand _before_ the _Mahrchen:_  read it, and say whether it is
worthy or not worthy.  Will this _Appendix_ do, then?  I should
really rather like the _Mahrchen_ to be printed, and had thoughts
of putting [it] at the end of the English _Sartor._  The other I
care not for, intrinsically, but think it very beautiful in its
kind.--Some rubbish of my own, in small quantity, exists here and
there in _Fraser;_  one story, entitled _Cruthers and Jonson,_
was written sixteen years ago, and printed somewhere early
(probably the second year) in that rubbish heap, with several
gross errors of the press (mares for maces was one!):  it is the
first thing I wrote, or among the very first;--otherwise a thing
to be kept rather secret, except from the like of you!  This or
any other of the "original" immaturities I will _not_ recommend
as an Appendix;  I hope the _Mahrchen,_ or the _Novelle_ and
_Mahrchen,_ will suffice.  But on the whole, to thee, O Friend,
and thy judgment and decision, without appeal, I leave it
altogether.  Say Yes, say No;  do what seemeth good to thee.--Nay
now, writing with the speed of light, another consideration
strikes me:  Why should Volume Third be interfered with if it is
finished?  Why will not this _Appendix_ do, these _Appendixes,_
to hang to the skirts of Volume Four as well?  Perhaps better!
the _Mahrchen_ in any case closing the rear.  I leave it all to
Emerson and Stearns Wheeler, my more than kind Editors:  E. knows
it better than I;  be his decision irrevocable.

This letter is far too long, but I had not time to make it
shorter.--I got your _French Revolution,_ and have seen no other:
my name is on it in your hand.  I received Dwight's Book, liked
it, and have answered him:  a good youth, of the kind you
describe;  no Englishman, to my knowledge, has yet uttered as
much sense about Goethe and German things.  I go this day to
settle with Fraser about printers and a second edition of the
_Revolution_ Book,--as specified in the other Letter:  five
hundred copies for America, which are to cost he computes about
2/7, and _your_ Bookseller will bind them, and defy Piracy.  My
Lectures come on, this day two weeks:  O Heaven! I cannot
"speak";  I can only gasp and writhe and stutter, a spectacle to
gods and fashionables,--being forced to it by want of money.  In
five weeks I shall be free, and then--!  Shall it be Switzerland,
shall it be Scotland, nay, shall it be America and Concord?

Ever your affectionate
T. Carlyle

All love from both of us to the Mother and Boy.  My Wife is
better than usual;  rejoices in the promise of summer now
at last visible after a spring like Greenland.  Scarcity,
discontent, fast ripening towards desperation, extends far
and wide among our working people.  God help them!  In man as
yet is small help.  There will be work yet, before that account
is liquidated;  a generation or two of work!  Miss Martineau is
gone to Switzerland, after emitting _Deerwood_ [sic], a Novel.
How do you like it?  people ask.  To which there are serious answers
returnable, but few so good as none.  Ah me!  Lady Bulwer too has
written a Novel, in satire of her Husband.  I saw the Husband not
long since;  one of the wretchedest Phantasms, it seemed to me, I
had yet fallen in with,--many, many, as they are here.

The L100 Sterling Bill came, in due time, in perfect order;  and
will be payable one of these days.  I forget dates; but had well
calculated that before the 19th of March this piece of news and
my gratitude for it had reached you.




XXXVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Learning here in town that letters may go today
to the "Great Western," I seize the hour to communicate a
bookseller's message.  I told Brown, of C.C. Little & Co., that
you think of stereotyping the _History._  He says that he can
make it profitable to himself and to you to use your plates here
in this manner (which he desires may be kept secret here, and I
suppose with you also).  You are to get your plates made and
proved, then you are to send them out here to him, having first
insured them in London, and he is to pay you a price for every
copy he prints from them.  As soon as he has printed a supply for
our market,--and we want, he says, five hundred copies now,--he
will send them back to you.  I told him I thought he had better
fix the price per copy to be paid by him, and I would send it to
you as his offer.  He is willing to do so, but not today.  It was
only this morning I informed him of your plan.  I think in a
fortnight I shall need to write again,--probably to introduce to
you my countrywoman, Miss Sedgwick, the writer of affectionate
New England tales and the like, who is about to go to Europe for
a year or more.  I will then get somewhat definite from Brown as
to rates and prices.  Brown thought you might better send the
plates here first, as we are in immediate want of copies;  and
afterwards print with them in London.  He is quite sure that it
would be more profitable to print them in this manner than to
try to import and sell here the books after being manufactured
in London.

On the 30th of April we shall ship at New York the first two
volumes of the _Miscellanies,_ two hundred and sixty copies.  In
four weeks, the second two volumes will be finished, unless we
wait for something to be added by yourself, agreeably to a
suggestion of Wheeler's and mine.  Two copies of _Schiller's
Life_ will go in the same box.  We send them to the port of
London.  When these are gone, only one hundred copies remain
unsold of the first two volumes (_Miscellanies_).

Brown said it was important that the plates should be proved
correct at London by striking off impressions before they were
sent hither.  This is the whole of my present message.  I shall
have somewhat presently to reply to your last letter, received
three weeks since.  And may health and peace dwell with you
and yours!

R.W. Emerson




XXXIX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Behold my account!  A very simple thing, is it
not!  A very mouse, after such months, almost years, of promise!
Despise it not, however;  for such is my extreme dulness at
figures and statements that this nothing has been a fear to me, a
long time, how to extract it from the bookseller's promiscuous
account with me, and from obscure records of my own.  You see
that it promises yet to pay you between $60 and $70 more, if
Mr. Fuller (a gentleman of Providence, who procured many
_subscribers_ for us there) and Mr. Owen (who owes us also
for copies subscribed for) will pay us our demand.  They have
both been lately reminded of their delinquency.  Herrick and
Noyes, you will see credited for eight copies, $18.  They are
booksellers who supplied eight subscribers, and charged us $2 for
their trouble and some alleged damage to a copy.  One copy you
will see is sold to Ann Pomeroy for $3.  This lady bought the
copy of me, and preferred sending me $3 to sending $2.50 for so
good a book.  You will notice one or two other variations in the
prices, in each of which I aimed to use a friend's discretion.
Add lastly, that you must revise all my figures, as I am a
hopeless blunderer, and quite lately made a brilliant mistake in
regard to the amount of 9 multiplied by 12.

Have I asked you whether you received from me a copy of the
_History?_  I designated a copy to go, and the bookseller's boy
thinks he sent one, but there is none charged in their account.
The account of the _Miscellanies_ does not prosper quite
so well....

Thanks for your too friendly and generous expectations from my
wit.  Alas! my friend, I can do no such gay thing as you say.  I
do not belong to the poets, but only to a low department of
literature, the reporters;  suburban men.  But in God we are all
great, all rich, each entitled to say, All is mine.  I hope the
advancing season has restored health to your wife, and, if
benedictions will help her, tell her we send them on every west
wind.  My wife and babes are well.

R.W.E.




XL. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I received last night C.C. Little & Co.'s
proposition in reference to the stereotyping the _History._
Their offer is based on my statement that you proposed to print
the book in two volumes similar to ours.  They say, "We should be
willing to pay three hundred dollars for the use of plates for
striking off five hundred copies of the two volumes, with the
farther agreement that, if we wished to strike off another five
hundred in nine months after the publication of the first five
hundred, we should have the liberty to do so, paying the same
again;  that is, another three hundred dollars for the privilege
of printing another five hundred copies;--the plates to be
furnished us ready for use and free of expense."  They add,
"Should Mr. Carlyle send the plates to this country, he should be
particular to ship them to _this port direct._"  I am no judge of
the liberality of this offer, as I know nothing of the expense of
the plates.  The men, Little and Brown, are fair in their
dealings, and the most respectable book-selling firm in Boston.
When you have considered the matter, I hope you will send me as
early an answer as you can.  For as we have no protection from
pirates we must use speed.

I ought to have added to my account and statement sent by Miss
Sedgwick one explanation.  You will find in the account a credit
of $13.75, agreed on with Little & Co., as compensation for lost
subscribers.  We had a little book, kept in the bookshop, into
which were transferred the names of subscribers from all lists
which were returned from various places.  These names amounted to
two hundred, more or less.  When we came to settle the account,
this book could not be found.  They expressed much regret, and
made much vain searching.  Their account with me recorded only
one hundred and thirty-four copies delivered to subscribers.
Thus, a large number, say sixty-six, had been sold by them to our
subscribers, and our half-dollar on each copy put in their pocket
as commission, expressly contrary to treaty!  With some ado, I
mustered fifty-five names of subscribers known to me as such, not
recorded on their books as having received copies, and demanded
$27.50.  They replied that they also had claims;  that they had
sent the books to distant subscribers in various States, and had
charged no freight (with one or two exceptions, when the books
went alone);  that other booksellers had, no doubt, in many
cases, sold the copies to subscribers for which I claimed the
half-dollar;  and lastly, which is indeed the moving reason, that
they had sent twenty copies up the Mississippi to a bookseller
(in Vicksburg, I think), who had made them no return.  On these
grounds they proposed that they should pay half my demand, and so
compromise.  They said, however, that, if I insisted, they would
pay the whole.  I was so glad to close the affair with mutual
goodwill that I said with the unjust steward, write $13.75.  So
are we all pleased at your expense. [Greek]  I think I will not
give you any more historiettes,--they take too much room;  but as
I write this time only on business, you are welcome to this from
your friend,

R.W. Emerson




XLI. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Last Saturday, 11th instant, I had your two
letters of 13th and 17th April.  Before now, you must have one or
two notes of mine touching the stereotype plates:  a proposition
superseded by your new plan.  I have also despatched one or two
sheets lately containing accounts.  Now for the new matter.  I
was in Boston yesterday, and saw Brown, the bookseller.  He
accedes gladly, to the project of five hundred American copies of
the _History._  He says, that the duty is the same on books in
sheets and books in boards;  and desires, therefore, that the
books may come out _bound._  You bind yours in cloth?  Put up his
in the same style as those for your market, only a little more
strongly than is the custom with London books, as it will only
cost a little more.  He would be glad also to have his name added
in the titlepage (London:  Published by J. Fraser; and Boston:
by C.C. Little and James Brown, 112 Washington St.), or is not
this the right way?  He only said he should like to have his name
added.  He threatens to charge me 20 percent commission.  If, as
he computes from your hint of 2/7, the work costs you, say, 70
cents per copy, unbound;  he reckons it at a dollar, when bound;
then 75 cents duty in Boston, $1.75.  He thinks we cannot set a
higher price on it than $3.50, _because_ we sold our former
edition for $2.50.   On that price, his commissions would be 70
cents;  and $1.05 per copy will to you.  If when we see the book,
we venture to put a higher price on it, your remainder shall be
more.  I confess, when I set this forth on paper, it looks as bad
as your English trade,--this barefaced 20 percent;  but their
plea is, We guarantee the sales;  we advertise;  we pay you when
it is sold, though we give our customers six months' credit.  I
have made no final bargain with the man, and perhaps before the
books arrive I shall be better advised, and may get better terms
from him.  Meantime, give me the best advice you can;  and
despatch the books with all speed, and if you send six hundred, I
think, we will sell them.

I went to the _Athenaeum,_ and procured the _Frasers'_ and will
print the _Novelle_ and the _Mahrchen_ at the end of the Fourth
Volume, which has been loitering under one workman for a week or
two past, awaiting this arrival.  Now we will finish at once.
_Cruthers and Jonson_ I read gladly.  It is indispensable to such
as would see the fountains of Nile:  but I incline to what seems
your opinion, that it will be better in the final edition of your
Works than in this present First Collection of them.  I believe I
could find more matter now of yours if we should be pinched
again.  The Cat-Raphael? and _Mirabeau_ and _Macaulay?_  Stearns
Wheeler is very faithful in his loving labor,--has taken a world
of pains with the sweetest smile.  We are very fortunate in
having him to friend.--For the _Miscellanies_ once more, the two
boxes containing two hundred and sixty copies of the first series
went to sea in the "St. James," Captain Sebor, addressed to Mr.
Fraser.  (I hope rightly addressed;  yet I saw a memorandum at
Munroe's in which he was named _John_ Fraser.)

Arthur Buller has my hearty thanks for his good and true
witnessing.  And now that our old advice is indorsed by John Bull
himself, you will believe and come.  Nothing can be better.  As
soon as the lectures are over, let the trunks be packed.  Only my
wife and my blessed sister dear--Elizabeth Hoar, betrothed in
better times to my brother Charles,--my wife and this lovely nun
do say that Mrs. Carlyle must come hither also;  that it will
make her strong, and lengthen her days on the earth, and cheer
theirs also.  Come, and make a home with me;  and let us make a
truth that is better than dreams.  From this farm-house of mine
you shall sally forth as God shall invite you, and "lecture in
the great cities."  You shall do it by proclamation of your own,
or by the mediation of a committee, which will readily be found.
Wife, mother, and sister shall nurse thy wife meantime, and you
shall bring your republican laurels home so fast that she shall
not sigh for the Old England.  Eyes here do sparkle at the very
thought.  And my little placid Musketaquid River looked gayer
today in the sun.  In very sooth and love, my friend, I shall
look for you in August.  If aught that we know not must forbid
your wife at present, you will still come.  In October, you shall
lecture in Boston;  in November, in New York;  in December, in
Philadelphia;  in January, in Washington.  I can show you three
or four great natures, as yet unsung by Harriet Martineau or Anna
Jameson, that content the heart and provoke the mind.  And for
yourself, you shall be as cynical and headstrong and fantastical
as you can be.

I rejoice in what you say of better health and better prospects.
I was glad to hear of Milnes, whose _Poems_ already lay on my
table when your letter came.  Since the little _Nature_ book is
not quite dead, I have sent you a few copies, and wish you would
offer one to Mr. Milnes with my respects.  I hope before a great
while I may have somewhat better to send him.  I am ashamed that
my little books should be "quoted" as you say.

My affectionate salutations to Mrs. Carlyle, who is to sanction
and enforce all I have written on the migration.  In the prospect
of your coming I feel it to be foolish to write.  I have very
much to say to you.  But now only Good Bye.

R.W. Emerson




XLII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Your Letter, dated Boston, 20th April, has been
here for some two weeks.  Miss Sedgwick, whom it taught us to
expect in "about a fortnight," has yet given no note of herself,
but shall be right welcome whenever she appears.  Miss
Martineau's absence (she is in Switzerland this summer) will
probably be a loss to the fair Pilgrim;--which of course the rest
of us ought to exert ourselves to make good.... My Lectures are
happily over ten days ago;  with "success" enough, as it is
called;  the only _valuable_ part of which is some L200, gained
with great pain, but also with great brevity:--economical respite
for another solar year!  The people were boundlessly tolerant;
my agitation beforehand was less this year, my remorse afterwards
proportionally greater.  There was but one moderately good
Lecture, the last,--on Sausculottism, to an audience mostly Tory,
and rustling with the beautifulest quality silks!  Two things I
find:  first that _I ought to have had a horse;_  I had only
three incidental rides or gallops, hired rides;  my horse
_Yankee_ is never yet purchased, but it shall be, for I cannot
live, except in great pain, without a horse.  It was sweet beyond
measure to escape out of the dustwhirlpool here, and _fly,_ in
solitude, through the ocean of verdure and splendor, as far as
Harrow and back again;  and one's nerves were _clear_ next day,
and words lying in one like water in a well.  But the _second_
thing I found was, that extempore speaking, especially in the way
of Lecture, is an _art_ or craft, and requires an apprenticeship,
which I have never served.  Repeatedly it has come into my head
that I should go to America, this very Fall, and belecture you
from North to South till I learn it!  Such a thing does lie in
the bottom-scenes, should hard come to hard;  and looks pleasant
enough.--On the whole, I say sometimes, I must either begin a
Book, or do it.  Books are the lasting thing;  Lectures are like
corn ground into flour;  there are loaves for today, but no wheat
harvests for next year.  Rudiments of a new Book (thank Heaven!)
do sometimes disclose themselves in me.  _Festina lente._  It
ought to be better than the _French Revolution;_  I mean better
written.  The greater part of that Book, as I read proof-sheets
of it in these weeks, does nothing but _disgust_ me.  And yet it
was, as nearly as was good, the utmost that lay in me.  I should
not like to be nearer killed with any other Book!--Books too are
a triviality.  Life alone is great;  with its infinite spaces,
its everlasting times, with its Death, with its Heaven and its
Hell.  Ah me!

Wordsworth is here at present;  a garrulous, rather watery, not
wearisome old man.  There is a freshness as of brooks and
mountain breezes in him;  one says of him:  Thou art not great,
but thou art genuine;  well speed _thou._  Sterling is home from
Italy, recovered in health, indeed very well could he but _sit
still._  He is for Clifton, near Bristol, for the next three
months.  I hear him speak of some sonnet or other he means to
address to you:  as for me he knows well that I call his
verses timber toned, without true melody either in thought,
phrase or sound.  The good John!  Did you ever see such a vacant
turnip-lantern as that Walsingham Goethe?  Iconoclast Collins
strikes his wooden shoe through him, and passes on, saying almost
nothing.--My space is done!  I greet the little _maidkin,_ and
bid her welcome to this unutterable world.  Commend her, poor
little thing, to her little Brother, to her Mother and Father;--
Nature, I suppose, has sent her strong letters of recommendation,
without our help, to them all.  Where I shall be in six weeks is
not very certain;  likeliest in Scotland, whither our whole
household, servant and all, is pressingly invited, where they
have provided horses and gigs.  Letters sent hither will still
find me, or lie waiting for me, safe:  but perhaps the
_speediest_ address will be "Care of Fraser, 215 Regent Street."
My Brother wants me to the Tyrol and Vienna;  but I think I shall
not go.  Adieu, dear friend.    It is a great treasure to me that I
have you in this world.  My Wife salutes you all.--

Yours ever and ever,
               T. Carlyle




XLIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Chelsea, London, 24 June, 1833

Dear Friend,--Two Letters from you were brought hither by Miss
Sedgwick last week.  The series of post Letters is a little
embroiled in my head;  but I have a conviction that all hitherto
due have arrived;  that up to the date of my last despatch (a
_Proof-sheet_ and a Letter), which ought to be getting into your
hands in these very days, our correspondence is clear.  That
Letter and Proof-sheet, two separate pieces, were sent to
Liverpool some three weeks ago, to be despatched by the first
conveyance thence;  as I say, they are probably in Boston about
this time.  The Proof-sheet was one of the forty-seven such which
the new _French Revolution_ is to consist of:  with this, as with
a correct sample, you were to act upon some Boston Bookseller,
and make a bargain for me,--or at least report that none was to
be made.  A bad bargain will content me now, my hopes are not at
all high.

For the present, I am to announce on the part of Bookseller
Fraser that the First Portion of our celebrated _Miscellanies_
have been hovering about on these coasts for several weeks, have
lain safe "in the River" for some two weeks, and ought at last to
be safe in Fraser's shop today or else to morrow.  I will ask
there, and verify, before this Letter go.  The reason of these
"two weeks in the river" is that the packages were addressed
"_John_ Fraser, London," and the people had tried all the Frasers
in London before they attempted the right individual, James, of
215 Regent Street.  Of course, the like mistake in the second
case will be avoided.  A Letter, put ashore at Falmouth, and
properly addressed, but without any _signature,_ had first of all
announced that the thing was at the door, and so with this "John
Fraser," it has been knocking ever since, finding difficult
admission.  In the present instance, such delay has done no ill,
for Fraser will not sell till the Second Portion come;  and with
this the mistake will be avoided.  What has shocked poor James
much more is a circumstance which your Boston Booksellers have no
power to avoid:  the "enormousness" of the charges in our Port
here!  He sends me the account of them last Saturday, with eyes--
such as drew Priam's curtains:  L31 and odd silver, whereof L28
as duty on Books at L5 per cwt. is charged by the rapacious
Custom-house alone!  What help, O James?  I answer:  we cannot
bombard the British Custom-house, and sack it, and explode it;
we must yield, and pay it the money;  thankful for what is still
left.--On the whole, one has to learn by trying.  This notable
finance-expedient, of printing in the one country what is to be
sold in the other, did not take Vandalic custom-houses into view,
which nevertheless do seem to exist.  We must persist in it for
the present reciprocal pair of times, having started in it for
these:  but on future occasions always, we can ask the past;  and
_see_ whether it be not better to let each side of the water
stand on its own basis.

As for your "accounts," my Friend, I find them clear as day,
verifiable to the uttermost farthing.  You are a good man to
conquer your horror of arithmetic;  and, like hydrophobic Peter
of Russia making himself a sailor, become an Accountant for my
sake.  But now will you forgive me if I never do verify this same
account, or look at it more in this world except as a memento of
affection, its arithmetical ciphers so many hierograms, really
_sacred_ to me!  A reflection I cannot but make is that at bottom
this money was all yours;  not a penny of it belonged to me by
any law except that of helpful Friendship.  I feel as if I could
not examine it without a kind of crime.   For the rest, you may
rejoice to think that, thanks to you and the Books, and to Heaven
over all, I am for the present no longer poor;  but have a
reasonable prospect of existing, which, as I calculate, is
literally the most that money can do for a man.  Not for these
twelve years, never since I had a house to maintain with money,
have I had as much money in my possession as even now.  _Allah
kerim!_  We will hope all that is good on that side.  And
herewith enough of _it._

You tell me you are but "a reporter":  I like you for thinking
so.  And you will never know that it is _not true,_ till you have
tried.  Meanwhile, far be it from me to urge you to a trial
before your time come.  Ah, it will come, and soon enough;  much
better, perhaps, if it never came!--A man has "_such_ a baptism
to be baptized withal," no easy baptism;  and is "straitened till
it be accomplished."  As for me I honor peace before all things;
the silence of a great soul is to me greater than anything it
will ever say, it ever can say.  Be tranquil, my friend;  utter
no word till you cannot help it;--and think yourself a
"reporter," till you find (not with any great joy) that you are
not altogether that!

We have not yet seen Miss Sedgwick:  your Letters with her card
were sent hither by post we went up next day, but she was out;
no meeting could be arranged earlier than tomorrow evening, when
we look for her here.  Her reception, I have no doubt, will be
abundantly flattering in this England.  American Notabilities
are daily becoming notabler among us;  the ties of the two
Parishes, Mother and Daughter, getting closer and closer knit.
Indissoluble ties:--I reckon that this huge smoky Wen may, for
some centuries yet, be the best Mycale for our Saxon _Panionium,_
a yearly meeting-place of "All the Saxons," from beyond the
Atlantic, from the Antipodes, or wherever the restless wanderers
dwell and toil.  After centuries, if Boston, if New York, have
become the most convenient _"All-Saxondom,"_ we will right
cheerfully go thither to hold such festival, and leave the Wen.--
Not many days ago I saw at breakfast the notabest of all your
Notabilities, Daniel Webster.  He is a magnificent specimen;  you
might say to all the world, This is your Yankee Englishman, such
Limbs _we_ make in Yankeeland!  As a Logic-fencer, Advocate, or
Parliamentary Hercules, one would incline to back him at first
sight against all the extant world.  The tanned complexion, that
amorphous crag-like face;  the dull black eyes under their
precipice of brows, like dull anthracite furnaces, needing only
to be _blown;_  the mastiff-mouth, accurately closed:--I have not
traced as much of _silent Berserkir-rage,_ that I remember of, in
any other man.  "I guess I should not like to be your nigger!"--
Webster is not loquacious, but he is pertinent, conclusive;  a
dignified, perfectly bred man, though not English in breeding:  a
man worthy of the best reception from us;  and meeting such, I
understand.  He did not speak much with me that morning, but
seemed not at all to dislike me:  I meditate whether it is fit or
not fit that I should seek out his residence, and leave _my_ card
too, before I go?  Probably not;  for the man is political,
seemingly altogether;  has been at the Queen's levee, &c., &c.:
it is simply as a mastiff-mouthed _man_ that he is interesting to
me, and not otherwise at all.

In about seven days hence we go to Scotland till the July heats
be over.  That is our resolution after all.  Our address there,
probably till the end of August, is "Templand, Thornhill,
Dumfries, N. B.,"--the residence of my Mother-in-law, within a
day's drive of my Mother's.  Any Letter of yours sent by the old
constant address (Cheyne Row, Chelsea) will still find me there;
but the other, for that time, will be a day or two shorter.  We
all go, servant and all.  I am bent on writing _something;_  but
have no faith that I shall be able.  I _must_ try.  There is a
thing of mine in _Fraser_ for July, of no account, about the
"sinking of the _Vengeur_" as you will see.  The _French
Revolution_ printing is not to stop;  two thirds of it are done;
at this present rate, it ought to finish, and the whole be ready,
within three weeks hence.  A Letter will be here from you about
that time, I think:  I will print no title-page for the Five
Hundred till it do come.  "Published by _Fraser and_ Little"
would, I suppose, be unobjectionable, though Fraser is the most
nervous of creatures:  but why put _him_ in at all, since these
Five hundred copies are wholly Little's and yours?  Adieu, my
Friend.  Our blessings are with you and your house.  My wife
grows better with the hot weather;  I, always worse.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle

I say not a word about America or Lecturing at present;  because
I mean to consider it intently in Scotland, and there to decide.
My Brother is to be at Ischl (not far from Salzburg) during
Summer:  he was anxious to have me there, and I to have gone;
but--but--Adieu.

_Fraser's Shop._  Books not yet come, but known to be safe, and
expected soon.  Nay, the dexterous Fraser has argued away L15 of
the duty, he says!  All is right therefore.  N.B. he says you are
to send the second Portion _in sheets,_ the weight will be less.
This if it be still time.--_Basta._

T.C.




XLIV. Emerson to Carlyle

I hear tonight, O excellent man! that, unless I send a letter to
Boston tomorrow with the peep of day, it will miss the Liverpool
steamer, which sails earlier than I dreamed of.  O foolish
Steamer!  I am not ready to write.  The facts are not yet ripe,
though on the turn of the blush.  Couldst not wait a little?
Hurry is for slaves;--and Aristotle, if I rightly remember only
that little from my college lesson, affirmed that the high-minded
man never walked fast.  O foolish Steamer! wait but a week, and
we will style thee Megalopsyche, and hang thee by the Argo in the
stars.  Meantime I will not deny the dear and admirable man the
fragments of intelligence I have.  Be it known unto you then,
Thomas Carlyle, that I received yesterday morning your letter by
the "Liverpool" with great contentment of heart and mind, in all
respects, saving that the American Hegira, so often predicted on
your side and prayed on ours, is treated with a most unbecoming
levity and oblivion;  and, moreover, that you do not seem to have
received all the letters I seem to have sent.  With the letter
came the proof-sheet safe, and shall be presently exhibited to
Little and Brown.  You must have already the result of our first
colloquy on that matter.  I can now bring the thing nearer to
certainty.  But you must print their names as before advised on
the title-page.

Nearly four weeks ago Ellis sent me the noble Italian print for
my wife.  She is in Boston at this time, and I believe will be
glad that I have written without her aid or word this time, for
she was so deeply pleased with the gift that she said she never
could write to you.  It came timely to me at least.  It is a
right morning thought, full of health and flowing genius, and I
rejoice in it.  It is fitly framed and tomorrow is to be hung in
the parlor.

Our Munroe's press, you must believe, was of Aristotle's category
of the high-minded and slow.  Chiding would do no good.  They
still said, "We have but one copy, and so but one hand at work"!
At last, on the 1st of July, the book appeared in the market, but
does not come from the binder fast enough to supply the instant
demand;  and therefore your two hundred and sixty copies cannot
part from New York until the 20th of July.  They will be on board
the London packet which sails on that day.  The publisher has his
instructions to bind the volumes to match the old ones.  Our year
since the publication of the Vols. I. and II. is just complete,
and I have set the man on the account, but doubt if I get it
before twelve or fourteen days.  All the edition is gone except
forty copies, he told me;  and asked me if I would not begin to
print a small edition of this First Series, five hundred, as we
have five hundred of the new Series too many, with that view.
But I am now so old a fox that I suspend majestically my answer
until I have his account.  For on the 21st of July I am to pay
$462 for the paper of this new book:  and by and by the printer's
bill,--whose amount I do not yet know;  and it is better to be
"slow and high-minded" a little more, since we have been so much,
and not go deeper into these men's debt until we have tasted
somewhat of their credit.  We are to get, as you know, by
contract, near a thousand dollars from these first two volumes;
yet a month ago I was forced to borrow two hundred dollars for
you on interest, such advances had the account required.  But the
coming account will enlighten us all.

I am very happy in the "success" of the London lectures.  I have
no word to add tonight, only that Sterling is not timber-toned,
that I love his poetry, that I admire his prose with reservations
here and there.  What he knows he writes manly and well.  Now and
then he puts in a pasteboard man;  but all our readers here take
_Blackwood_ for his sake, and lately seek him in vain.  I am
getting on with some studies of mine prosperously for me, have
got three essays nearly done, and who knows but in the autumn I
shall have a book?  Meantime my little boy and maid, my mother
and wife, are well, and the two ladies send to you and yours
affectionate regards,--they would fain say urgent invitations.
My mother sends tonight, my wife always.

I shall send you presently a copy of a translation published here
of Eckermann, by Margaret Fuller, a friend of mine and of yours,
for the sake of its preface mainly.  She is a most accomplished
lady, and her culture belongs rather to Europe than to America.
Good bye.

R.W. Emerson




XLV. Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, 8 August, 1839

Dear Friend,--This day came the letter dated 24 June, with "steam
packet" written by you on the outside, but no paddles wheeled it
through the sea.  It is forty-five days old, and too old to do
its errand even had it come twenty days sooner--so far as printer
and bookbinder are concerned.  I am truly grieved for the
mischance of the _John_ Fraser, and will duly lecture the sinning
bookseller.  I noticed the misnomer in a letter of his New York
correspondent, and, I believe, mentioned to you in a letter my
fear of such a mischance.  I am more sorry for the costliness
of this adventure to you, though in a gracious note to me you
cut down the fine one half.  The new books, tardily printed,
were tardily bound and tardily put to sea on the packet ship
"Ontario," which left New York for London on the 1st of August.
At least this was the promise of Munroe & Co.  I stood over the
boxes in which they were packing them in the latter days of July.
I hope they have not gone to John again, but you must keep an eye
to both names....

I cannot tell you how glad I am that you have seen my brave
Senator, and seen him as I see him.  All my days I have wished
that he should go to England, and never more than when I listened
two or three times to debates in the House of Commons.  We send
out usually mean persons as public agents, mere partisans, for
whom I can only hope that no man with eyes will meet them;  and
now those thirsty eyes, those portrait-eating, portrait-painting
eyes of thine, those fatal perceptions, have fallen full on the
great forehead which I followed about all my young days, from
court-house to senate-chamber, from caucus to street.  He has his
own sins no doubt, is no saint, is a prodigal.  He has drunk this
rum of Party too so long, that his strong head is soaked,
sometimes even like the soft sponges, but the "man's a man for a'
that."  Better, he is a great boy,--as wilful, as nonchalant and
good-humored.  But you must hear him speak, not a show speech
which he never does well, but _with cause_ he can strike a stroke
like a smith.  I owe to him a hundred fine hours and two or three
moments of Eloquence.  His voice in a great house is admirable.
I am sorry if you decided not to visit him.  He loves a _man,_
too.  I do not know him, but my brother Edward read law with him,
and loved him, and afterwards in sick and unfortunate days
received the steadiest kindness from him.

Well, I am glad you are to think in earnest in Scotland of our
Cisatlantic claims.  We shall have more rights over the wise and
brave, I believe before many years or months.  We shall have more
men and a better cause than has yet moved on our stagnant waters.
I think our Church, so called, must presently vanish.  There is a
universal timidity, conformity, and rage;  and on the other hand
the most resolute realism in the young.  The man Alcott bides his
time.  I have a young poet in this village named Thoreau, who
writes the truest verses.  I pine to show you my treasures;  and
tell your wife, we have women who deserve to know her.

R.W. Emerson

The Yankees read and study the new volumes of _Miscellanies_ even
more than the old.  The "Sam Johnson" and "Scott" are great
favorites.  Stearns Wheeler corrected proofs affectionately to
the last.  Truth and Health be with you alway!




XLVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--A cheerful and right welcome Letter of yours,
dated 4th July, reached me here, duly forwarded, some three
weeks ago;  I delayed answering till there could some definite
statement, as to bales of literature shipped or landed, or other
matter of business forwarded a stage, be made.  I am here, with
my Wife, rusticating again, these two months;  amid diluvian
rains, Chartism, Teetotalism, deficient harvest, and general
complaint and confusion;  which not being able to mend, all that
I can do is to heed them as little as possible.  "What care I for
the house?  I am only a lodger."  On the whole, I have sat under
the wing of Saint Swithin;  uncheery, sluggish, murky, as the
wettest of his Days;--hoping always, nevertheless, that blue sky,
figurative and real, does exist, and will demonstrate itself by
and by.  I have been the stupidest and laziest of men.  I could
not write even to you, till some palpable call told me I must.

Yesternight, however, there arrives a despatch from Fraser,
apprising me that the American _Miscellanies,_ second cargo, are
announced from Portsmouth, and "will probably be in the River
tomorrow";  where accordingly they in all likelihood now are, a
fair landing and good welcome to them!  Fraser "knows not whether
they are bound or not";  but will soon know.  The first cargo, of
which I have a specimen here, contented him extremely;  only
there was one fatality, the cloth of the binding was multiplex,
party-colored, some sets done in green, others in red, blue,
perhaps skyblue!  Now if the second cargo were not multiplex,
party-colored, nay multiplex, _in exact concordance with the
first,_ as seemed almost impossible--?--Alas, in that case, one
could not well predict the issue!--Seriously, it is a most
handsome Book you have made;  and I have nothing to return but
thanks and again thanks.  By the bye, if you do print a small
second edition of the First Portion, I might have had a small set
of errata ready:  but _where are they?_  The Book only came into
my hand here a few days ago;  and I have been whipt from post
to pillar without will of my own, without energy to form a
will!  The only glaring error I recollect at this moment is one
somewhere in the second article on _Jean Paul:_   "Osion" (I
think, or some such thing) instead of "Orson":  it is not an
original American error, but copied from the English;  if the
Printer get his eye upon it, let him rectify;  if not, not, I
_deserve_ to have it stand against me there.  Fraser's joy,
should the Books prove either unbound or multiplex in the right
way, will be great and unalloyed;  he calculates on selling all
the copies very soon.  He has begun reprinting Goethe's _Wilhelm
Meister_ too, the _Apprenticeship_ and _Travels_ under one;  and
hopes to remunerate himself for that by and by:  whether there
will then remain any small peculium for me is but uncertain;
meanwhile I correct the press, nothing doubting.  One of these I
call my best Translation, the other my worst;  I have read that
latter, the _Apprenticeship,_ again in these weeks;  not without
surprise, disappointment, nay, aversion here and there, yet on
the whole with ever new esteem.  I find I can pardon _all_ things
in a man except purblindness, falseness of vision,--for, indeed,
does not that presuppose every other kind of falseness?

But let me hasten to say that the _French Revolution,_ five
hundred strong for the New England market, is also, as Fraser
advises, "to go to sea in three days."  It is bound in red cloth,
gilt;  a pretty book, James says;  which he will sell for
twenty-five shillings here;--nay, the London brotherhood have
"subscribed" for one hundred and eighty at once, which he
considers great work.  I directed him to consign to Little and
Brown in Boston, the _property_ of the thing _yours,_ with such
phraseology and formalities as they use in those cases.  I paid
him for it yesterday (to save discount) L95;  that is the whole
cost to me, twenty or thirty pounds more than was once calculated
on.  Do the best with it you can, my friend;  and never mind the
result.  If the thing fail, as is likely enough, we will simply
quit that transport trade, and my experience must be _paid for._
The Title-page was "Boston:  Charles C. Little and James Brown,"
then in a second line and smaller type, "London James Fraser";
to which arrangement James made not the slightest objection, or
indeed rather seemed to like it.--So much for trade matters:  is
it not _enough?_  I declare I blush sometimes, and wonder where
the good Emerson gets all his patience.  We shall be through the
affair one day, and find something better to speak about than
dollars and pounds.  And yet, as you will say, why not even of
dollars?  Ah, there are leaden-worded [bills] of exchange I
have seen which have had an almost sacred character to me!
_Pauca verba._

Doubt not your new utterances are eagerly waited for here;  above
all things the "Book" is what I want to see.  You might have told
me what it was about.  We shall see by and by.  A man that has
discerned somewhat, and knows it for himself, let him speak it
out, and thank Heaven.  I pray that they do not confuse you by
praises;  their blame will do no harm at all.  Praise is sweet to
all men;  and yet alas, alas, if the light of one's own heart go
out, bedimmed with poor vapors and sickly false glitterings and
flashings, what profit is it!  Happier in darkness, in all manner
of mere outward darkness, misfortune and neglect, "so that _thou
canst endure,_"--which however one cannot to all lengths.  God
speed you, my Brother!  I hope all good things of you;  and
wonder whether like Phoebus Apollo you are destined to be a youth
forever.--Sterling will be right glad to hear your praises;  not
unmerited, for he is a man among millions that John of mine,
though his perpetual mobility wears me out at times.  Did he ever
write to you?  His latest speculation was that he should and
would;  but I fancy it is among the clouds again.  I hear from
him the other day, out of Welsh villages where he passed his
boyhood, &c., all in a flow of "lyrical recognition," hope,
faith, and sanguine unrest;  I have even some thoughts of
returning by Bristol (in a week or so, that must be), and seeing
him.  The dog has been reviewing me, he says, and it is coming
out in the next _Westminster!_  He hates terribly my doctrine of
_"Silence."_  As to America and lecturing, I cannot in this
torpid condition venture to say one word.  Really it is not
impossible;  and yet lecturing is a thing I shall never grow to
like;  still less lionizing, Martineau-ing:  _Ach Gott!_  My Wife
sends a thousand regards;  _she_ will never get across the ocean,
you must come to her;  she was almost _dead_ crossing from
Liverpool hither, and declares she will never go to sea for any
purpose whatsoever again.  Never till next time!  My good old
Mother is here, my Brother John (home with his Duke from Italy);
all send blessings and affection to you and yours.  Adieu till I
get to London.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle



XLVII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--What a time since we have written to one
another! was it you that defalcated?  Alas, I fear it was myself;
I have had a feeling these nine or ten weeks that you were
expecting to hear from me;  that I absolutely could not write.
Your kind gift of Fuller's _Eckermann_ was handed in to our
Hackney coach, in Regent Street, as we wended homewards from the
railway and Scotland, on perhaps the 8th of September last;  a
welcome memorial of distant friends and doings:  nay, perhaps
there was a Letter two weeks prior to that:--I am a great sinner!
But the truth is, I could not write;  and now I can and do it!

Our sojourn in Scotland was stagnant, sad;  but tranquil, _well
let alone,_--an indispensable blessing to a poor creature fretted
to fiddle-strings, as I grow to be in this Babylon, take it as I
will.  We had eight weeks of desolate rain;  with about eight
days bright as diamonds intercalated in that black monotony of
bad weather.  The old Hills are the same;  the old Streams go
gushing along as in past years, in past ages;  but he that looks
on them is no longer the same:  and the old Friends, where are
they?  I walk silent through my old haunts in that country;  sunk
usually in inexpressible reflections, in an immeasurable chaos of
musings and mopings that cannot be reflected or articulated.  The
only work I had on hand was one that would not prosper with me:
an Article for the _Quarterly Review_ on the state of the Working
Classes here.  The thoughts were familiar to me, old, many years
old;  but the utterance of them, in what spoken dialect to utter
them!  The _Quarterly Review_ was not an eligible vehicle, and
yet the eligiblest;  of Whigs, abandoned to Dilettantism and
withered sceptical conventionality, there was no hope at all;
the _London-and-Westminster_ Radicals, wedded to their Benthamee
Formulas, and tremulous at their own shadows, expressly rejected
my proposal many months ago:  Tories alone remained;  Tories I
often think have more stuff in them, in spite of their blindness,
than any other class we have;--Walter Scott's _sympathy_ with his
fellow creatures, what is it compared with Sydney Smith's, with a
Poor Law Commissioner's!  Well:  this thing would not prosper
with me in Scotland at all;  nor here at all, where nevertheless
I had to persist writing;  writing and burning, and cursing my
destiny, and then again writing.  Finally the thing came out, as
an Essay on _Chartism;_  was shown to Lockhart, according to
agreement;  was praised by him, but was also found unsuitable by
him;  suitable to _explode_ a whole fleet of Quarterlies into
sky-rockets in these times!  And now Fraser publishes it himself,
with some additions, as a little Volume;  and it will go forth in
a week or two on its own footing;  and England will see what she
has to say to it, whether something or nothing;  and one man, as
usual, is right glad that he has nothing more to do with it.
This is the reason why I could not write.  I mean to send you the
Proof-sheets of this thing, to do with as you see cause;  there
will be but some five or six, I think.  It is probable my New
England brothers may approve some portions of it;  may be curious
to see it reprinted;  you ought to say Yes or No in regard to
that.  I think I will send all the sheets together;  or at
farthest, at two times.

Fraser, when we returned hither, had already received his
_Miscellanies;_  had about despatched his five hundred _French
Revolutions,_ insured and so, forth, consigned, I suppose, to
your protection and the proper booksellers;  probably they have
got over from New York into your neighborhood before now.  Much
good may they do you!  The _Miscellanies,_ with their variegated
binding, proved to be in perfect order;  and are now all sold;
with much regret from poor James that we had not a thousand more
of them!  This thousand he now sets about providing by his own
industry, poor man;  I am revising the American copy in these
days;  the printer is to proceed forthwith.  I admire the good
Stearns Wheeler as I proceed;  I write to him my thanks by this
post, and send him by Kennet a copy of Goethe's _Meister,_ for
symbol of acknowledgment.  Another copy goes off for you, to the
care of Little and Company.  Fraser has got it out two weeks ago;
a respectable enough book, now that the version is corrected
somewhat.  Tell me whether you dislike it less;  what you do
think of it?  By the by, have you not learned to read German now?
I rather think you have.  It is three months spent well, if ever
months were, for a thinking Englishman of this age.--I hope
Kennet will use more despatch than he sometimes does.  Thank
Heaven for these Boston Steamers they project!  May the Nereids
and Poseidon favor them!  They will bring us a thousand miles
nearer, at one step;  by and by we shall be of one parish
after all.

During Autumn I speculated often about a Hegira into New England
this very year:  but alas! my horror of _Lecturing_ continues
great;  and what else is there for me to do there?  These several
years I have had no wish so pressing as to hold my peace.  I
begin again to feel some use in articulate speech;  perhaps I
shall one day have something that I want to utter even in your
side of the water.  We shall see.  Patience, and shuffle the
cards.--I saw no more of Webster;  did not even learn well where
he was, till lately I noticed in the Newspapers that he had gone
home again.  A certain Mr. Brown (I think) brought me a letter
from you, not long since;  I forwarded him to Cambridge and
Scotland:  a modest inoffensive man.  He said he had never
personally met with Emerson.  My Wife recalled to him the story
of the Scotch Traveler on the top of Vesuvius:  "Never saw so
beautiful a scene in the world!"--"Nor I," replied a stranger
standing there, "except once;  on the top of Dunmiot, in the
Ochil Hills in Scotland."--"Good Heavens!  That is a part of my
Estate, and I was never there!  I will go thither."  Yes, do!--We
have seen no other Transoceanic that I remember.  We expect your
_Book_ soon!  We know the subject of your Winter Lectures too;
at least Miss Martineau thinks she does, and makes us think so.
Heaven speed the work!  Heaven send my good Emerson a clear
utterance, in all right ways, of the nobleness that dwells in
him!  He knows what silence means;  let him know speech also, in
its season the two are like canvas and pigment, like darkness and
light-image painted thereon;  the one is essential to the other,
not possible without the other.

Poor Miss Martineau is in Newcastle-on-Tyne this winter;  sick,
painfully not dangerously;  with a surgical brother-in-law.  Her
meagre didacticalities afflict me no more;  but also her blithe
friendly presence cheers me no more.  We wish she were back.
This silence, I calculate, forced silence, will do her much good.
If I were a Legislator, I would order every man, once a week or
so, to lock his lips together, and utter no vocable at all
for four-and-twenty hours:  it would do him an immense benefit,
poor fellow.  Such racket, and cackle of mere hearsay and
sincere-cant, grows at last entirely deafening, enough to drive
one mad, --like the voice of mere infinite rookeries answering
your voice!  Silence, silence!  Sterling sent you a Letter from
Clifton, which I set under way here, having added the address.
He is not well again, the good Sterling;  talks of Madeira this
season again:  but I hope otherwise.  You of course read his
sublime "article"?  I tell him it was--a thing untellable!

Mr. Southey has fallen, it seems, into a mournful condition:
oblivion, mute hebetation, loss of all faculty.  He suffered
greatly, nursing his former wife in her insanity, for years till
her relief by death;  suffered, worked, and made no moan;  the
brunt of the task over, he sank into collapse in the hands of a
new wife he had just wedded.  What a lot for him;  for her
especially!  The most excitable but most methodic man I have ever
seen.  [Greek] that is a word that awaits us all.--I have my
brother here at present;  though talking of Lisbon with his
Buccleuchs.  My Wife seems better than of late winters.  I
actually had a Horse, nay actually have it, though it has gone to
the country till the mud abate again!  It did me perceptible
good;  I mean to try it farther.  I am no longer so desperately
poor as I have been for twelve years back;  sentence of
starvation or beggary seems revoked at last, a blessedness
really very considerable.  Thanks, thanks!  We send a thousand
regards to the two little ones, to the two mothers.  _Valete
nostrum memores._

T. Carlyle




XLVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, 12 December, 1839

My Dear Friend,--Not until the 29th of November did the five
hundred copies of the _French Revolution_ arrive in Boston.
Fraser unhappily sent them to New York, whence they came not
without long delays.  They came in perfectly good order, not in
the pretty red you told us of, but in a sober   green;--not so
handsome and salable a back, our booksellers said, as their own;
but in every other respect a good book.  The duties at the New
York Custom House on these and a quantity of other books sent by
Fraser amounted to $400.36, whereof, I understand, the _French
Revolution_ pays for its share $243.  No bill has been brought us
for freight, so we conclude that you have paid it.  I confided
the book very much to the conscience and discretion of Little and
Brown, and after some ciphering they settle to sell it at $3.75
per copy, wherefrom you are to get the cost of the book, and
(say) $1.10 per copy profit, and no more.  The booksellers
eat the rest.  The book is rather too dear for our market of
cheap manufactures, and therefore we are obliged to give the
booksellers a good percentage to get it off at all:  for we stand
in daily danger of a cheap edition from some rival neighbor.  I
hope to give you good news of its sale soon, although I have been
assured today that no book sells, the times are so bad.  Brown
had disposed of fifty or sixty copies to the trade, and twelve at
retail.  He doubted not to sell them all in six months....

Several persons have asked me to get some copies of the _German
Romance_ sent over here for sale.  Last week a gentleman desired me
to say he wanted four copies, and today I have been charged to
procure another.  I think, if you will send me by Little and Brown,
through Longman, six copies, we can find an immediate market.

It gives me great joy to write to my friend once more, slow as
you may think me to use the privilege.  For a good while I dared
believe you were coming hither, and why should I write?--and now
for weeks I have been absorbed in my foolish lectures, of which
only two are yet delivered and ended.  There should be eight
more;  subject, "The Present Age."  Out of these follies I
remember you with glad heart.  Lately I had Sterling's letter,
which, since I have read his article on you, I am determined to
answer speedily.  I delighted in the spirit of that paper, loving
you so well and accusing you so conscientiously.  What does he at
Clifton?  If you communicate with him, tell him I thank him for
his letter, and hold him dear.  I am very happy lately in adding
one or two new friends to my little circle, and you may be sure
every friend of mine is a friend of yours.  So when you come here
you shall not be lonely.  A new person is always to me a great
event, and will not let me sleep.--I believe I was not wise to
volunteer myself to this fever fit of lecturing again.  I ought
to have written instead in silence and serenity.  Yet I work
better under this base necessity, and then I have a certain
delight (base also?) in speaking to a multitude.  But my joy in
friends, those sacred people, is my consolation for the mishaps
of the adventure, and they for the most part come to me from this
_publication_ of myself.--After ten or twelve weeks I think I
shall address myself earnestly to writing, and give some form to
my formless scripture.

I beg you will write to me and tell me what you do, and give me
good news of your wife and your brother.  Can they not see the
necessity of your coming to look after your American interests?
My wife and mother love both you and them.  A young man of New
York told me the other day he was about getting you an invitation
from an Association in that city to give them a course of
lectures on such terms as would at least make you whole in the
expenses of coming thither.  We could easily do that in Boston.

R.W. Emerson

What manner of person is Heraud?  Do you read Landor, or know
him, O seeing man?  Farewell!




XLIX. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--It is you, I surely think, that are in my debt
now;  nevertheless I must fling you another word:  may it
cross one from you coming hither--as near the _Lizard Point_ as
it likes!

Some four sheets making a Pamphlet called _Chartism_ addressed to
you at Concord are, I suppose, snorting along through the waters
this morning, part of the Cargo of the "British Queen."  At least
I gave them to Mr. Brown (your unseen friend) about ten days ago,
who promised to dispose of them;  the "British Queen," he said,
was the earliest chance.  The Pamphlet itself (or rather booklet,
for Fraser has gilt it, &c., and asks five shillings for it as a
Book) is out since then;  radicals and others yelping
considerably in a discordant manner about it;  I have nothing
other to say to _you_ about it than what I said last time, that
the sheets were _yours_ to do with as you saw good,--to burn if
you reckoned that fittest.  It is not entirely a Political
Pamphlet;  nay, there are one or two things in it which my
American Friends specially may like:  but the interests discussed
are altogether English, and cannot be considered as likely to
concern New-Englishmen very much.  However, it will probably be
itself in your hand before this sheet, and you will have
determined what is fit.

A copy of _Wilhelm Meister,_ two copies, one for Stearns Wheeler,
are probably in some of the "Line Ships" at this time too:  good
voyage to them!  The _French Revolutions_ were all shipped,
invoiced, &c.;  they have, I will suppose, arrived safe, as we
shall hear by and by.  What freightages, landings, and
embarkments!  For only two days ago I sent you off, through
Kennet, another Book:  John Sterling's _Poems,_ which he has
collected into a volume.  Poor John has overworked himself again,
or the climate without fault on his side has proved too hard for
him:  he sails for Madeira again next week!  His Doctors tell me
there is no intrinsic danger;  but they judge the measure safe as
one of precaution.  It is very mortifying he had nestled himself
down at Clifton, thinking he might now hope to continue there;
and lo! he has to fly again.--Did you get his letter?  The
address to him now will be, for three months to come, "_Edward_
Sterling, Esq., South Place, Knightsbridge, London," his
Father's designation.

Farther I must not omit to say that Richard Monckton Milnes
purposes, through the strength of Heaven, to _review_ you!  In
the next Number of the _London and Westminster,_ the courageous
youth will do this feat, if they let him.  Nay, he has already
done it, the Paper being actually written he employed me last
week in negotiating with the Editors about it;  and their answer
was, "Send us the Paper, it promises very well."  We shall see
whether it comes out or not;  keeping silence till then.  Milnes
is a _Tory_ Member of Parliament;  think of that!  For the rest,
he describes his religion in these terms:  "I profess to be a
Crypto-Catholic."  Conceive the man!  A most bland-smiling, semi-
quizzical, affectionate, high-bred, Italianized little man, who
has long olive-blond hair, a dimple, next to no chin, and flings
his arm round your neck when he addresses you in public society!
Let us hear now what he will say, of the American _Vates._



L. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Your Letter of the 12th of December, greatly, to
my satisfaction, has arrived;  the struggling Steamship, in spite
of all hurricanes, has brought it safe across the waters to me.
I find it good to write you a word in return straightway;  though
I think there are already two, or perhaps even three, messages of
mine to you flying about unacknowledged somewhere under the moon;
nay, the last of them perhaps may go by the same packet as this,
--having been forwarded, as this will be, to _Liverpool,_ after
the "British Queen" sailed from London.

Your account of the _French Revolution_ packages, and prognosis
of what Little and Brown will do with them, is altogether as it
should be.  I apprised Fraser instantly of his invoiceless Books,
&c.;  he answers, that order has been taken in that long since,
"instructions" sent, and, I conclude, arrangements for _bills_
least of all forgotten.  I mentioned what share of the duty was
his;  and that your men meant to draw on him for it.  That is all
right.  As to the _French Revolution,_ I agree with your
Booksellers altogether about it;  the American Edition actually
pleases myself better for looking at;  nor do I know that
this new English one has much superiority for use:  it is
despicably printed, I fear, so far as false spellings and other
slovenlinesses can go.  Fraser "finds the people like it";
_credat Judaeus;_--as for me, I have told him I will _not print
any more_ with that man, but with some other man.  Curious
enough, the price Little and Brown have fixed upon was the price
I remember guessing at beforehand, and the result they propose to
realize for me corresponds closely with my prophecy too.  Thanks,
a thousand thanks, for all the trouble you never grudge to take.
We shall get ourselves handsomely out of this export and import
speculation;  and know, taught at a rather _cheap_ rate, not to
embark in the like again.

There went off a _Wilhelm Meister_ for you, and a letter to
announce it, several weeks ago;  that was message first.  Your
traveling neighbor, Brown, took charge of a Pamphlet named
_Chartism,_ to be put into the "British Queen's" Letter-bag
(where I hope, and doubt not, he did put it, though I have seen
nothing of him since);  that and a letter in reference to it was
message second.  Thirdly, I sent off a volume of _Poems_ by
Sterling, likewise announced in that letter.  And now this that I
actually write is the fourth (it turns out to be) and last of all
the messages.  Let us take Arithmetic along with us in all
things.--Of _Chartism_ I have nothing farther to say, except that
Fraser is striking off another One Thousand copies to be called
Second Edition;  and that the people accuse me, not of being
an incendiary and speculative Sansculotte threatening to
become practical, but of being a Tory,--thank Heaven.  The
_Miscellanies_ are at press;  at _two_ presses;  to be out, as
Hope asseverates, in March:  five volumes, without _Chartism;_
with Hoffmann and Tieck from German Romance, stuck in somewhere
as Appendix;  with some other trifles stuck in elsewhere, chiefly
as Appendix;  and no essential change from the Boston Edition.
Fraser, "overwhelmed with business," does not yet send me his net
result of those Two Hundred and Fifty Copies sold off some
time ago;  so soon as he does, you shall hear of it for your
satisfaction.--As to _German Romance,_ tell my friends that it
has been out of print these ten years;  procurable, of late not
without difficulty, only in the Old-Bookshops.  The comfort is
that the best part of it stands in the new _Wilhelm Meister:_
Fraser and I had some thought of adding Tieck's and Richter's
parts, had they suited for a volume;  the rest may without
detriment to anybody perish.

Such press-correctings and arrangings waste my time here, not in
the agreeablest way.  I begin, though in as sulky a state of
health as ever, to look again towards some new kind of work.  I
have often thought of Cromwell and Puritans;  but do not see how
the subject can be presented still alive.  A subject dead is not
worth presenting.  Meanwhile I read rubbish of Books;  Eichhorn,
Grimm, &c.;  very considerable rubbish;  one grain in the cart
load worth pocketing.  It is pity I have no appetite for
lecturing!  Many applications have been made to me here;--none
more touching to me than one, the day before yesterday, by a
fine, innocent-looking Scotch lad, in the name of himself and
certain other Booksellers' shopmen eastward in the City!  I
cannot get them out of my head.  Poor fellows! they have nobody
to say an honest word to them, in this articulate-speaking world,
and they apply to _me._--For you, good friend, I account you
luckier;  I do verily:  lecture there what innumerable things you
have got to say on "The Present Age";--yet withal do not forget
to _write_ either, for that is the lasting plan after all.  I
have a curious Note, sent me for inspection the other day;  it is
addressed to a Scotch Mr. Erskine (famed among the saints here)
by a Madame Necker, Madame de Stael's kinswoman, to whom he, the
said Mr. Erskine, had lent your first Pamphlet at Geneva.  She
regards you with a certain love, yet a _shuddering_ love.  She
says, "Cela sent l'Americain qui apres avoir abattu les forets a
coup de hache, croit qu'on doit de meme conquerir le monde
intellectuel"!  What R.M. Milnes will say of you we hope also to
see.--I know both Heraud and Landor;  but alas, what room is
here!  Another sheet with less of "Arithmetic" in it will soon be
allowed me.  Adieu, dear friend.

Yours, ever and ever,
T. Carlyle




LI. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I have just seen the steamer "British Queen"
enter the harbor from sea, and here lies the "Great Western," to
sail tomorrow.  I will not resist hints so broad upon my long
procrastinations.  You shall have at least a tardy acknowledgment
that I received in January your letter of December, which I
should have answered at once had it not found me absorbed in
writing foolish lectures which were then in high tide.  I had
written you, a little earlier, tidings of the receipt of your
_French Revolution._  Your letter was very welcome, as all
your letters are.  I have since seen tidings of the _Essay on
Chartism_ in an English periodical, but have not yet got my
proof-sheets.  They are probably still rolling somewhere outside
of this port, for all our packetships have had the longest
passages:  only one has come in for many a week.  We will be as
patient as we can.

I am here on a visit to my brother, who is a lawyer in this city,
and lives at Staten Island, at a distance of half an hour's sail.
The city has such immense natural advantages and such
capabilities of boundless growth, and such varied and ever
increasing accommodations and appliances for eye and ear, for
memory and wit, for locomotion and lavation, and all manner of
delectation, that I see that the poor fellows that live here do
get some compensation for the sale of their souls.  And how they
multiply!  They estimate the population today at 350,000, and
forty years ago, it is said, there were but 20,000.  But I always
seem to suffer some loss of faith on entering cities.  They are
great conspiracies;  the parties are all maskers, who have taken
mutual oaths of silence not to betray each other's secret and
each to keep the other's madness in countenance.  You can scarce
drive any craft here that does not seem a subornation of the
treason.  I believe in the spade and an acre of good ground.
Whoso cuts a straight path to his own bread, by the help of God
in the sun and rain and sprouting of the grain, seems to me an
_universal_ workman.  He solves the problem of life, not for one,
but for all men of sound body.  I wish I may one day send you
word, or, better, show you the fact, that I live by my hands
without loss of memory or of hope.  And yet I am of such a puny
constitution, as far as concerns bodily labor, that perhaps I
never shall.  We will see.

Did I tell you that we hope shortly to send you some American
verses and prose of good intent?  My vivacious friend Margaret
Fuller is to edit a journal whose first number she promises for
the 1st of July next, which I think will be written with a good
will if written at all.  I saw some poetical fragments which
charmed me,--if only the writer consents to give them to
the public.

I believe I have yet little to tell you of myself.  I ended in
the middle of February my ten lectures on the Present Age.  They
are attended by four hundred and fifty to five hundred people,
and the young people are so attentive;  and out of the hall ask
me so many questions, that I assume all the airs of Age and
Sapience.  I am very happy in the sympathy and society of from
six to a dozen persons, who teach me to hope and expect
everything from my countrymen.  We shall have many Richmonds in
the field presently.  I turn my face homeward to-morrow, and this
summer I mean to resume my endeavor to make some presentable book
of Essays out of my mountain of manuscript, were it only for the
sake of clearance.  I left my wife, and boy, and girl,--the
softest, gracefulest little maiden alive, creeping like a turtle
with head erect all about the house,--well at home a week ago.
The boy has two deep blue wells for eyes, into which I gladly
peer when I am tired.  Ellen, they say, has no such depth of orb,
but I believe I love her better than ever I did the boy.  I
brought my mother with me here to spend the summer with William
Emerson and his wife and ruddy boy of four years.  All these
persons love and honour you in proportion to their knowledge
and years.

My letter will find you, I suppose, meditating new lectures for
your London disciples.  May love and truth inspire them!  I can
see easily that my predictions are coming to pass, and that.
having waited until your Fame wag in the floodtide, we shall not
now see you at all on western shores.  Our saintly Dr. T---, I am
told, had a letter within a year from Lord Byron's daughter,
_informing_ the good man of the appearance of a certain wonderful
genius in London named Thomas Carlyle, and all his astonishing
workings on her own and her friends' brains, and him the very
monster whom the Doctor had been honoring with his best dread and
consternation these five years.  But do come in one of Mr.
Cunard's ships as soon as the booksellers have made you rich.  If
they fail to do so, come and read lectures which the Yankees will
pay for.  Give my love and hope and perpetual remembrance to your
wife, and my wife's also, who bears her in her kindest heart, and
who resolves every now and then to write to her, that she may
thank her for the beautiful Guido.

You told me to send you no more accounts.  But I certainly shall,
as our financial relations are grown more complex, and I wish at
least to relieve myself of this unwonted burden of booksellers'
accounts and long delays, by sharing them.  I have had one of
their estimates by me a year, waiting to send.  Farewell.

R.W.E.




LII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--A Letter has been due to you from me, if not by
palpable law of reciprocity, yet by other law and right, for some
week or two.  I meant to write, so soon as Fraser and I had got a
settlement effected.  The traveling Sumner being about to return
into your neighborhood, I gladly accept his offer to take a
message to you.  I wish I had anything beyond a dull Letter to
send!  But unless, as my Wife suggests, I go and get you a
D'Orsay _Portrait_ of myself, I see not what there is!  Do you
read German or not?  I now and then fall in with a curious German
volume, not perhaps so easily accessible in the Western world.
Tell me.  Or do you ever mean to learn it?  I decidedly wish you
would.--As to the D'Orsay Portrait, it is a real curiosity:
Count D'Orsay the emperor of European Dandies portraying the
Prophet of spiritual Sansculottism!  He came rolling down hither
one day, many months ago, in his sun-chariot, to the bedazzlement
of all bystanders;  found me in dusty gray-plaid dressing-gown,
grim as the spirit of Presbyterianism (my Wife said), and
contrived to get along well enough with me.  I found him a man
worth talking to, once and away;  a man of decided natural gifts;
every utterance of his containing in it a wild caricature
_likeness_ of some object or other;  a dashing man, who might,
some twenty years sooner born, have become one of Bonaparte's
Marshals, and _is,_ alas,--Count D'Orsay!  The Portrait he dashed
off in some twenty minutes (I was dining there, to meet Landor);
we have not chanced to meet together since, and I refuse to
undergo any more eight-o'clock dinners for such an object.--Now
if I do not send you the Portrait, after all?

Fraser's account of the _Miscellanies_ stood legibly extended
over large spaces of paper, and was in several senses amazing to
look upon.  I trouble _you_ only with the result.  Two Hundred
and forty-eight copies (for there were some one or two
"imperfect"):  all these he had sold, at two guineas each;  and
sold swiftly, for I recollect in December, or perhaps November,
he told me he was "holding back," not to run entirely out.  Well,
of the L500 and odd so realized for these Books, the portion that
belonged to me was L239,--the L261 had been the expense of
handing the ware   to Emerson over the counter, and drawing in
the coin for it!  "Rules of the Trade";--it is a Trade, one would
surmise, in which the Devil has a large interest.  However,--not
to spend an instant polluting one's eyesight with that side of
it,--let me feel joyfully, with thanks to Heaven and America,
that I do receive such a sum in the shape of wages, by decidedly
the noblest method in which wages could come to a man.  Without
Friendship, without Ralph Waldo Emerson, there had been no
sixpence of that money here.  Thanks, and again thanks.  This
earth is not an unmingled ball of Mud, after all.  Sunbeams
visit it;--mud _and_ sunbeams are the stuff it has from of old
consisted of.--I hasten away from the Ledger, with the mere good-
news that James is altogether content with the "progress" of all
these Books, including even the well-abused _Chartism_ Book.  We
are just on the point of finishing our English reprint of the
_Miscellanies;_  of which I hope to send you a copy before long.

And now why do not _you_ write to me?  Your Lectures must be done
long ago.  Or are you perhaps writing a Book?  I shall be right
glad to hear of that;  and withal to hear that you do not hurry
yourself, but strive with deliberate energy to produce what in
you is best.  Certainly, I think, a right Book does lie in the
man!  It is to be remembered also always that the true value is
determined by what we _do not_ write!  There is nothing truer
than that now all but forgotten truth;  it is eternally true.  He
whom it concerns can consider it.--You have doubtless seen
Milnes's review of you.  I know not that you will find it to
strike direct upon the secret of _Emerson,_ to hit the nail on
the head, anywhere at all;  I rather think not.  But it is
gently, not unlovingly done;--and lays the first plank of a kind
of pulpit for you here and throughout all Saxondom:  a thing
rather to be thankful for.  It on the whole surpassed my
expectations.  Milnes tells me he is sending you a copy and a
Note, by Sumner.  He is really a pretty little robin-redbreast of
a man.

You asked me about Landor and Heraud.  Before my paper entirely
vanish, let me put down a word about them.  Heraud is a
loquacious scribacious little man, of middle age, of parboiled
greasy aspect, whom Leigh Hunt describes as "wavering in the most
astonishing manner between being Something and Nothing."  To me
he is chiefly remarkable as being still--with his entirely
enormous vanity and very small stock of faculty--out of Bedlam.
He picked up a notion or two from Coleridge many years ago;  and
has ever since been rattling them in his head, like peas in an
empty bladder, and calling on the world to "List the Music of the
spheres."  He escapes _assassination,_ as I calculate, chiefly by
being the cheerfulest best-natured little creature extant.--You
cannot kill him he laughs so softly, even when he is like killing
you.  John Mill said, "I forgive him freely for interpreting the
Universe, now when I find he cannot pronounce the _h's!_"  Really
this is no caricature;  you have not seen the match of Heraud in
your days.  I mentioned to him once that Novalis had said, "The
highest problem of Authorship is the writing of a Bible."--
"That is precisely what I am doing!" answered the aspiring,
unaspirating.--Of Landor I have not got much benefit either.  We
met first, some four years ago, on Cheyne Walk here:  a tall,
broad, burly man, with gray hair, and large, fierce-rolling eyes;
of the most restless, impetuous vivacity, not to be held in by
the most perfect breeding,--expressing itself in high-colored
superlatives, indeed in reckless exaggeration, now and then in a
dry sharp laugh not of sport but of mockery;  a wild man, whom no
extent of culture had been able to tame!  His intellectual
faculty seemed to me to be weak in proportion to his violence of
temper:  the judgment he gives about anything is more apt to be
wrong than right,--as the inward whirlwind shows him this side or
the other of the object;  and _sides_ of an object are all that
he sees.  He is not an original man;  in most cases one but sighs
over the spectacle of common place torn to rags.  I find him
painful as a writer;  like a soul ever promising to take wing
into the Aether, yet never doing it, ever splashing webfooted in
the terrene mud, and only splashing the worse the more he
strives!  Two new tragedies of his that I read lately are the
fatalest stuff I have seen for long:  not an ingot;  ah no, a
distracted coil of wire-drawings salable in no market.  Poor
Landor has left his Wife (who is said to be a fool) in Italy,
with his children, who would not quit her;  but it seems he has
honestly surrendered all his money to her, except a bare annuity
for furnished lodgings;  and now lives at Bath, a solitary
sexagenarian, in that manner.  He visits London in May;  but says
always it would kill him soon:  alas, I can well believe that!
They say he has a kind heart;  nor does it seem unlikely:  a
perfectly honest heart, free and fearless, dwelling amid such
hallucinations, excitations, tempestuous confusions, I can see he
has.  Enough of him!  Me he likes well enough, more thanks to
him;  but two hours of such speech as his leave me giddy and
undone.  I have seen some other Lions, and Lion's-_providers;_
but consider them a worthless species.--When will you write,
then?  Consider my frightful outlook with a Course of Lectures to
give "On Heroes and Hero-worship,"--from Odin to Robert Burns!
My Wife salutes you all.  Good be in the Concord Household!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




LIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Three weeks ago I received a letter from you
following another in the week before, which I should have
immediately acknowledged but that I was promised a private
opportunity for the 25th of April, by which time I promised
myself to send you sheets of accounts.  I had also written you
from New York about the middle of March.  But now I suppose Mr.
Grinnell--a hospitable, humane, modest gentleman in Providence,
R.I., a merchant, much beloved by all his townspeople, and,
though no scholar, yet very fond of silently listening to such--
is packing his trunk to go to England.  He offered to carry any
letters for me, and as at his house during my visit to Providence
I was eagerly catechised by all comers concerning Thomas Carlyle,
I thought it behoved me to offer him for his brethren, sisters,
and companions' sake, the joy of seeing the living face of that
wonderful man.  Let him see thy face and pass on his way.  I who
cannot see it, nor hear the voice that comes forth of it, must
even betake me to this paper to repay the best I can the love of
the Scottish man, and in the hope to deserve more.

Your letter announces _Wilhelm Meister,_ Sterling's _Poems,_ and
_Chartism._  I am very rich, or am to be.  But Kennet is no
Mercury.  _Wilhelm_ and _Sterling_ have not yet made their
appearance, though diligently inquired after by Stearns Wheeler
and me.  Little and Brown now correspond with Longman, not with
Kennet.  But they will come soon, perhaps are already arrived.

_Chartism_ arrived at Concord by mail not until one of the last
days of March, though dated by you, I think, the 21st of
December.  I returned home on the 3d of April, and found it
waiting.  All that is therein said is well and strongly said, and
as the words are barbed and feathered the memory of men cannot
choose but carry them whithersoever men go.  And yet I thought
the book itself instructed me to look for more.  We seemed to
have a right to an answer less concise to a question so grave and
humane, and put with energy and eloquence.  I mean that whatever
probabilities or possibilities of solution occurred should have
been opened to us in some detail.  But now it stands as a
preliminary word, and you will one day, when the fact itself is
riper;  write the Second Lesson;  or those whom you have
influenced will.  I read the book twice hastily through, and sent
it directly to press, fearing to be forestalled, for the London
book was in Boston already.  Little and Brown are to print it.
Their estimate is:--

     Printing page for page with copy ....... $63.35
     Paper  .....................................44.00
     Binding .................................. 90.00
     Total .................................... $197.35

Costing say twenty cents per copy for one thousand copies bound.
The book to sell for fifty cents:  the Bookseller's commission
twenty percent on the Retail price.  The author's profit fifteen
cents per copy.  They intend, if a cheap edition is published,--
no unlikely event,--to stitch the book as pamphlet, and sell it
at thirty-eight cents.  I expect it from the press in a few days.
I shall not on this sheet break into the other accounts, as I am
expecting hourly from Munroe's clerk an entire account of
R.W.E. with T.C., of which I have furnished him with all the
facts I had, and he is to write it out in the manner of his
craft.  I did not give it to him until I had made some unsuccessful
experiments myself.

I am here at work now for a fortnight to spin some single cord
out of my thousand and one strands of every color and texture
that lie raveled around me in old snarls.  We need to be
possessed with a mountainous conviction of the value of our
advice to our contemporaries, if we will take such pains to find
what that is.  But no, it is the pleasure of the spinning that
betrays poor spinners into the loss of so much good time.  I
shall work with the more diligence on this book to-be of mine,
that you inform me again and again that my penny tracts are still
extant;  nay, that, beside friendly men, learned and poetic men
read and even review them.  I am like Scholasticus of the Greek
Primer, who was ashamed to bring out so small a dead child before
such grand people.  Pygmalion shall try if he cannot fashion a
better, certainly a bigger.--I am sad to hear that Sterling sails
again for his health.  I am ungrateful not to have written to
him, as his letter was very welcome to me.  I will not promise
again until I do it.  I received a note last week forwarded by
Mr. Hume from New York, and instantly replied to greet the good
messenger to our Babylonian city, and sent him letters to a few
friends of mine there.  But my brother writes me that he had left
New York for Washington when he went to seek him at his lodgings.
I hope he will come northward presently, and let us see his face.

_22 April._--Last evening came true the promised account drawn up
by Munroe's clerk, Chapman.  I have studied it with more zeal
than success.  An account seems an ingenious way of burying
facts:  it asks wit equal to his who hid them to find them.  I am
far as yet from being master of this statement, yet, as I have
promised it so long, I will send it now, and study a copy of it
at my leisure.  It is intended to begin where the last account I
sent you, viz. of _French Revolution,_ ended, with a balance of
$9.53 in your favor.... I send you also a paper which Munroe drew
up a long time ago by way of satisfying me that, so far as the
first and second volumes [of the _Miscellanies_] were concerned,
the result had accorded with the promise that you should have
$1,000 profit from the edition.  We prosper marvelously on paper,
but the realized benefit loiters.  Will you now set some friend
of yours in Fraser's shop at work on this paper, and see if this
statement is true and transparent.  I trust the Munroe firm,--
chiefly Nichols, the clerical partner,--and yet it is a duty to
understand one's own affair.  When I ask, at each six months'
reckoning, why we should always be in debt to them, they still
remind me of new and newer printing, and promise correspondent
profits at last.  By sending you this account I make it entirely
an affair between you and them.  You will have all the facts
which any of us know.  I am only concerned as having advanced the
sums which are charged in the account for the payment of paper
and printing, and which promise to liquidate themselves soon, for
Munroe declares he shall have $550 to pay me in a few days.  For
the benefit of all parties bid your clerk sift them.  One word
more and I have done with this matter, which shall not be weary
if it comes to good,--the account of the London five hundred
_French Revolution_ is not yet six months old, and so does not
come in.  Neither does that of the second edition of the first
and second volumes of the _Miscellanies,_ for the same reason.
They will come in due time.  I have very good hope that my friend
Margaret Fuller's Journal--after many false baptisms now saying
it will be called _The Dial,_ and which is to appear in July--
will give you a better knowledge of our young people than any you
have had.  I will see that it goes to you when the sun first
shines on its face.  You asked me if I read German, and I forget
if I have answered.  I have contrived to read almost every volume
of Goethe, and I have fifty-five, but I have read nothing else:
but I have not now looked even into Goethe for a long time.
There is no great need that I should discourse to you on books,
least of all on _his_ books;  but in a lecture on Literature, in
my course last winter, I blurted all my nonsense on that subject,
and who knows but Margaret Fuller may be glad to print it and
send it to you?  I know not.

A Bronson Alcott, who is a great man if he cannot write well, has
come to Concord with his wife and three children and taken a
cottage and an acre of ground to get his living by the help of
God and his own spade.  I see that some of the Education people
in England have a school called "Alcott House" after my friend.
At home here he is despised and rejected of men as much as was
ever Pestalozzi.  But the creature thinks and talks, and I am
glad and proud of my neighbor.  He is interested more than need
is in the Editor Heraud.  So do not fail to tell me of him.  Of
Landor I would gladly know your knowledge.  And now I think I
will release your eyes.

Yours always,
R.W. Emerson




LIV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Since I wrote a couple of letters to you,--I
know not exactly when, but in near succession many weeks ago,--
there has come to me _Wilhelm Meister_ in three volumes, goodly
to see, good to read,--indeed quite irresistible;--for though I
thought I knew it all, I began at the beginning and read to the
end of the _Apprenticeship,_ and no doubt shall despatch the
_Travels,_ on the earliest holiday.  My conclusions and
inferences therefrom I will spare you now, since I appended them
to a piece I had been copying fairly for Margaret Fuller's
_Dial,_--"Thoughts on Modern Literature," and which is the
substance of a lecture in my last winter's course.  But I learn
that my paper is crowded out of the first Number, and is not to
appear until October.  I will not reckon the accidents that
threaten the ghost of an article through three months of pre-
existence!  Meantime, I rest your glad debtor for the good book.
With it came Sterling's _Poems,_ which, in the interim, I have
acknowledged in a letter to him.  Sumner has since brought me a
gay letter from yourself, concerning, in part, Landor and Heraud;
in which as I know justice is not done to the one I suppose it is
not done to the other.  But Heraud I give up freely to your
tender mercies:  I have no wish to save him.  Landor can be shorn
of all that is false and foolish, and yet leave a great deal for
me to admire.  Many years ago I have read a hundred fine
memorable things in the _Imaginary Conversations,_ though I know
well the faults of that book, and the _Pericles_ and _Aspasia_
within two years has given me delight.  I was introduced to the
man Landor when I was in Florence, and he was very kind to me in
answering a multitude of questions.  His speech, I remember, was
below his writing.  I love the rich variety of his mind, his
proud taste, his penetrating glances, and the poetic loftiness of
his sentiment, which rises now and then to the meridian, though
with the flight, I own, rather of a rocket than an orb, and
terminated sometimes by a sudden tumble.  I suspect you of very
short and dashing reading in his books;  and yet I should think
you would like him,--both of you such glorious haters of cant.
Forgive me, I have put you two together twenty times in my
thought as the only writers who have the old briskness and
vivacity.  But you must leave me to my bad taste and my perverse
and whimsical combinations.

I have written to Mr. Milnes who sent me by Sumner a copy of his
article with a note.  I addressed my letter to him at "London,"--
no more.  Will it ever reach him?  I told him that if I should
print more he would find me worse than ever with my rash,
unwhipped generalization.  For my journals, which I dot here at
home day by day, are full of disjointed dreams, audacities,
unsystematic irresponsible lampoons of systems, and all manner of
rambling reveries, the poor drupes and berries I find in my
basket after endless and aimless rambles in woods and pastures.
I ask constantly of all men whether life may not be poetic as
well as stupid?

I shall try and persuade Mr. Calvert, who has sent to me for a
letter to you, to find room in his trunk for a poor lithograph
portrait of our Concord "Battle-field," so called, and village,
that you may see the faint effigy of the fields and houses in
which we walk and love you.  The view includes my Grandfather's
house (under the trees near the Monument), in which I lived for a
time until I married and bought my present house, which is not in
the scope of this drawing.  I will roll up two of them, and, as
Sterling seems to be more nomadic than you, I beg you will send
him also this particle of foreign parts.

With this, or presently after it, I shall send a copy of the
_Dial._  It is not yet much;  indeed, though no copy has come to
me, I know it is far short of what it should be, for they have
suffered puffs and dulness to creep in for the sake of the
complement of pages;  but it is better than anything we had;  and
I have some poetry communicated to me for the next number which I
wish Sterling and Milnes to see.  In this number what say you to
the _Elegy_ written by a youth who grew up in this town and lives
near me,--Henry Thoreau?  A criticism on Persius is his also.
From the papers of my brother Charles, I gave them the fragments
on Homer, Shakespeare, Burke: and my brother Edward wrote the
little _Farewell,_ when last he left his home.  The Address of
the Editors to the Readers is all the prose that is mine, and
whether they have printed a few verses for me I do not know.  I
am daily expecting an account for you from Little and Brown.
They promised it at this time.  It will speedily follow this
sheet, if it do not accompany it.  But I am determined, if I
can, to send one letter which is not on business.  Send me
some word of the Lectures.  I have yet seen only the initial
notices.  Surely you will send me some time the D'Orsay portrait.
Sumner thinks Mrs. Carlyle was very well when he saw her last,
which makes me glad.--I wish you both to love me, as I am
affectionately Yours,

R.W. Emerson




LV. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Surely I am a sinful man to neglect so long
making any acknowledgment of the benevolent and beneficent
Arithmetic you sent me!  It is many weeks, perhaps it is months,
since the worthy citizen--your Host as I understood you in some
of your Northern States--stept in here, one mild evening, with
his mild honest face and manners;  presented me your Bookseller
Accounts;  talked for half an hour, and then went his way into
France.  Much has come and gone since then;  Letters of yours,
beautiful Disciples of yours:--I pray you forgive me!  I have
been lecturing;  I have been sick;  I have been beaten about in
all ways.  Nay, at bottom, it was only three days ago that I got
the _Bibliopoliana_ back from Fraser;  to whom, as you
recommended, I, totally inadequate like yourself to understand
such things, had straightway handed them for examination.  I
always put off writing till Fraser should have spoken.  I did not
urge him, or he would have spoken any day:  there is my sin.

Fraser declares the Accounts to be made out in the most beautiful
manner;  intelligible to any human capacity;  correct so far as
he sees, and promising to yield by and by a beautiful return of
money.  A precious crop, which we must not cut in the blade;
mere time will ripen it into yellow nutritive ears yet.  So he
thinks.  The only point on which I heard him make any criticism
was on what he called, if I remember, "the number of Copies
_delivered,_"--that is to say, delivered by the Printer and
Binder as actually available for sale.  The edition being of a
Thousand, there have only 984 come bodily forth;  16 are "waste."
Our Printers, it appears, are in the habit of _adding_ one for
every fifty beforehand, whereby the _waste_ is usually made good,
and more;  so that in One Thousand there will usually be some
dozen called "Author's copies" over and above.  Fraser supposes
your Printers have a different custom.  That is all.  The rest is
apparently every-way _right;_  is to be received with faith;
with faith, charity, and even hope,--and packed into the bottom
of one's drawer, never to be looked at more except on the
outside, as a memorial of one of the best and helpfulest of men!
In that capacity it shall lie there.

My Lectures were in May, about _Great Men._  The misery of it was
hardly equal to that of former years, yet still was very hateful.
I had got to a certain feeling of superiority over my audience;
as if I had something to tell them, and would tell it them.  At
times I felt as if I could, in the end, learn to speak.  The
beautiful people listened with boundless tolerance, eager
attention.  I meant to tell them, among other things, that man
was still alive, Nature not dead or like to die;  that all true
men continued true to this hour,--Odin himself true, and the
Grand Lama of Thibet himself not wholly a lie.  The Lecture on
Mahomet ("the Hero as Prophet") astonished my worthy friends
beyond measure.  It seems then this Mahomet was not a quack?  Not
a bit of him!  That he is a better Christian, with his "bastard
Christianity," than the most of us shovel-hatted?  I guess than
almost any of you!--Not so much as Oliver Cromwell ("the Hero as
King") would I allow to have been a Quack.  All quacks I asserted
to be and to have been Nothing, _chaff_ that would not grow:  my
poor Mahomet "was _wheat_ with barn sweepings";  Nature had
tolerantly hidden the barn sweepings;  and as to the _wheat,_
behold she had said Yes to it, and it was growing!--On the whole,
I fear I did little but confuse my esteemed audience:  I was
amazed, after all their reading of me, to be understood so ill;--
gratified nevertheless to see how the rudest _speech_ of a man's
heart goes into men's hearts, and is the welcomest thing there.
Withal I regretted that I had not six months of preaching,
whereby to learn to preach, and explain things fully!  In the
fire of the moment I had all but decided on setting out for
America this autumn, and preaching far and wide like a very lion
there.  Quit your paper formulas, my brethren,--equivalent to old
wooden idols, _un_divine as they:  in the name of God, understand
that you are alive, and that God is alive!  Did the Upholsterer
make this Universe?  Were you created by the Tailor?  I tell you,
and conjure you to believe me literally, No, a thousand times No!
Thus did I mean to preach, on "Heroes, Hero-worship, and the
Heroic";  in America too.  Alas! the fire of determination died
away again:  all that I did resolve upon was to write these
Lectures down, and in some way promulgate them farther.  Two of
them accordingly are actually written;  the Third to be begun on
Monday:  it is my chief work here, ever since the end of May.
Whether I go to preach them a second time extempore in America
rests once more with the Destinies.  It is a shame to talk so
much about a thing, and have it still hang _in nubibus:_  but I
was, and perhaps am, really nearer doing it than I had ever
before been.  A month or two now, I suppose, will bring us back
to the old nonentity again.  Is there, at bottom, in the world or
out of it, anything one would like so well, with one's whole
heart _well,_ as PEACE?  Is lecturing and noise the way to get at
that?  Popular lecturer!  Popular writer!  If they would
undertake in Chancery, or Heaven's Chancery, to make a wise man
Mahomet Second and Greater, "Mahomet of Saxondom," not reviewed
only, but worshiped for twelve centuries by all Bulldom, Yankee-
doodle-doodom, Felondom New Zealand, under the Tropics and in
part of Flanders,--would he not rather answer:  Thank you;  but
in a few years I shall be dead, twelve Centuries will have become
Eternity;  part of Flanders Immensity:  we will sit still here if
you please, and consider what quieter thing we can do!  Enough
of this.

Richard Milnes had a Letter from you, one morning lately, when I
met him at old Rogers's.  He is brisk as ever;  his kindly
_Dilettantism_ looking sometimes as if it would grow a sort of
Earnest by and by.  He has a new volume of Poems out:  I advised
him to try Prose;  he admitted that Poetry would not be generally
read again in these ages,--but pleaded, "It was so convenient for
veiling commonplace!"  The honest little heart!--We did not know
what to make of the bright Miss --- here;  she fell in love with
my wife;--the _contrary,_ I doubt, with me:  my hard realism
jarred upon her beautiful rose-pink dreams.  Is not all that very
morbid,--unworthy the children of Odin, not to speak of Luther,
Knox, and the other Brave?  I can do nothing with vapors, but
wish them _condensed._  Kennet had a copy of the English
_Miscellanies_ for you a good many weeks ago:  indeed, it was
just a day or two _before_ your advice to try Green henceforth.
Has the _Meister_ ever arrived?  I received a Controversial
Volume from Mr. Ripley:  pray thank him very kindly.  Somebody
borrowed the Book from me;  I have not yet read it.  I did read a
Pamphlet which seems now to have been made part of it.  Norton
surely is a chimera;  but what has the whole business they are
jarring about become?  As healthy _worshiping_ Paganism is to
Seneca and Company, so is healthy worshiping Christianity to--I
had rather not work the sum!--Send me some swift news of
yourself, dear Emerson.  We salute you and yours, in all
heartiness of brotherhood.

Yours ever and always--
T. Carlyle




LVI. Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, 30 August, 1840

My Dear Carlyle,--I fear, nay I know, that when I wrote last to
you, about the 1st of July, I promised to follow my sheet
immediately with a bookseller's account.  The bookseller did
presently after render his account, but on its face appeared the
fact--which with many and by me unanswerable reasons they
supported--that the balance thereon credited to you was not
payable until the 1st of October.  The account is footed "Net
sales of _French Revolution_ to 1 July, 1840, due October 1,
$249.77."  Let us hope then that we shall get, not only a new
page of statement, but also some small payment in money a month
hence.  Having no better story to tell, I told nothing.

But I will not let the second of the Cunard boats leave Boston
without a word to you.  Since I wrote by Calvert came your letter
describing your lectures and their success:  very welcome news,
for a good London newspaper, which I consulted, promised reports,
but gave none.  I have heard so oft of your projected trip to
America, that my ear would now be dull, and my faith cold, but
that I wish it so much.  My friend, your audience still waits for
you here willing and eager, and greatly larger no doubt than it
would have been when the matter was first debated.

Our community begin to stand in some terror of Transcendentalism,
and the _Dial,_ poor little thing, whose first number contains
scarce anything considerable or even visible, is just now honored
by attacks from almost every newspaper and magazine;  which at
least betrays the irritability and the instincts of the good
public.  But they would hardly be able to fasten on so huge a man
as you are any party badge.  We must all hear you for ourselves.
But beside my own hunger to see and know you, and to hear you
speak at ease and at large under my own roof, I have a growing
desire to present you to three or four friends, and them to you.
Almost all my life has been passed alone.  Within three or four
years I have been drawing nearer to a few men and women whose
love gives me in these days more happiness than I can write of.
How gladly I would bring your Jovial light upon this friendly
constellation, and make you too know my distant riches!  We have
our own problems to solve also, and a good deal of movement and
tendency emerging into sight every day in church and state, in
social modes and in letters.  I sometimes fancy our cipher is
larger and easier to read than that of your English society.

You will naturally ask me if I try my hand at the history of all
this,--I who have leisure, and write.  No, not in the near and
practical way in which they seem to invite.  I incline to write
philosophy, poetry, possibility,--anything but history.  And yet
this phantom of the next age limns himself sometimes so large and
plain that every feature is apprehensible, and challenges a
painter.  I can brag little of my diligence or achievement this
summer.  I dot evermore in my endless journal, a line on every
knowable in nature;  but the arrangement loiters long, and I get
a brick kiln instead of a house.--Consider, however, that all
summer I see a good deal of company,--so near as my fields are to
the city.  But next winter I think to omit lectures, and write
more faithfully.  Hope for me that I shall get a book ready to
send you by New-Year's-day.

Sumner came to see me the other day.  I was glad to learn all the
little that he knew of you and yours.  I do not wonder you set so
lightly by my talkative countryman.  He has brought nothing home
but names, dates, and prefaces.  At Cambridge last week I saw
Brown for the first time.  I had little opportunity to learn what
he knew.  Mr. Hume has never yet shown his face here.  He sent me
his Poems from New York, and then went South, and I know no more
of him.

My Mother and Wife send you kind regards and best wishes,--to you
and all your house.  Tell your wife that I hate to hear that she
cannot sail the seas.  Perhaps now she is stronger she will be a
better sailor.  For the sake of America will she not try the trip
to Leith again?  It is only twelve days from Liverpool to Boston.
Love, truth, and power abide with you always!

R.W.E.




LVII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Two Letters of yours are here, the latest of
them for above a week:  I am a great sinner not to have answered
sooner.  My way of life has been a thing of petty confusions,
uncertainties;  I did not till a short while ago see any definite
highway, through the multitude of byelanes that opened out on me,
even for the next few months.  Partly I was busy;  partly too, as
my wont is, I was half asleep:--perhaps you do not know the
_combination_ of these two predicables in one and the same
unfortunate human subject!  Seeing my course now for a little, I
must speak.

According to your prognosis, it becomes at length manifest that I
do _not_ go to America for the present.  Alas, no!  It was but a
dream of the fancy;  projected, like the French shoemaker's fairy
shoes, "in a moment of enthusiasm."  The nervous flutter of May
Lecturing has subsided into stagnancy;  into the feeling that, of
all things in the world, public speaking is the hatefulest for
me;  that I ought devoutly to thank Heaven there is no absolute
compulsion laid on me at present to speak!  My notion in general
was but an absurd one:  I fancied I might go across the sea, open
my lips wide;  go raging and lecturing over the Union like a very
lion (too like a frothy mountebank) for several months;--till I
had gained, say a thousand pounds;  therewith to retire to some
small, quiet cottage by the shore of the sea, at least three
hundred miles from this, and sit silent there for ten years to
come, or forever and a day perhaps!  That was my poor little day
dream;--incapable of being realized.  It appears, I have to stay
here, in this brick Babylon;  tugging at my chains, which will
not break for me:  the less I tug, the better.  Ah me!  On the
whole, I have written down my last course of lectures, and shall
probably print them;  and you, with the aid of proof-sheets, may
again print them;  that will be the easiest way of lecturing to
America!  It is truly very weak to speak about that matter so
often and long, that matter of coming to you;  and never to come.
_Frey ist das Herz,_ as Goethe says, _doch ist der Fuss
gebunden._  After innumerable projects, and invitations towards
all the four winds, for this summer, I have ended about a week
ago by--simply going nowhither, not even to see my dear aged
Mother, but sitting still here under the Autumn sky such as I
have it;  in these vacant streets I am lonelier than elsewhere,
have more chance for composure than elsewhere!  With Sterne's
starling I repeat to myself, "I can't get out."--Well, hang it,
stay in then;  and let people alone of it!

I have parted with my horse;  after an experiment of seven or
eight months, most assiduously prosecuted, I came to the
conclusion that, though it did me some good, there was not
_enough_ of good to warrant such equestrianism:  so I plunged
out, into green England, in the end of July, for a whole week of
riding, an _explosion_ of riding, therewith to end the business,
and send off my poor quadruped for sale.  I rode over Surrey,--
with a leather valise behind me and a mackintosh before;  very
singular to see:  over Sussex, down to Pevensey where the Norman
Bastard landed;  I saw Julius Hare (whose _Guesses at Truth_ you
perhaps know), saw Saint Dunstan's stithy and hammer, at
Mayfield, and the very tongs with which he took the Devil by the
nose;--finally I got home again, a right wearied man;  sent my
horse off to be sold, as I say;  and finished the writing of my
Lectures on Heroes.  This is all the rustication I have had, or
am like to have.  I am now over head and ears in _Cromwellian_
Books;  studying, for perhaps the fourth time in my life, to see
if it be possible to get any credible face-to-face acquaintance
with our English Puritan period;  or whether it must be left
forever a mere hearsay and echo to one.  Books equal in dulness
were at no epoch of the world penned by unassisted man.
Nevertheless, courage!  I have got, within the last twelve
months, actually, as it were, to _see_ that this Cromwell was one
of the greatest souls ever born of the English kin;  a great
amorphous semi-articulate _Baresark;_  very interesting to me.  I
grope in the dark vacuity of Baxters, Neales;  thankful for here
a glimpse and there a glimpse.  This is to be my reading for
some time.

The _Dial_ No. 1 came duly:  of course I read it with interest;
it is an utterance of what is purest, youngest in your land;
pure, ethereal, as the voices of the Morning!  And yet--you
know me--for me it is _too_ ethereal, speculative, theoretic:
all theory becomes more and more confessedly inadequate, untrue,
unsatisfactory, almost a kind of mockery to me!  I will have all
things condense themselves, take shape and body, if they are to
have my sympathy.  I have a _body_ myself;  in the brown leaf,
sport of the Autumn winds, I find what mocks all prophesyings,
even Hebrew ones,--Royal Societies, and Scientific Associations
eating venison at Glasgow, not once reckoned in!  Nevertheless go
on with this, my Brothers.  The world has many most strange
utterances of a prophetic nature in it at the present time;  and
this surely is worth listening to among the rest.  Do you know
English Puseyism?  Good Heavens! in the whole circle of History
is there the parallel of that,--a true worship rising at this
hour of the day for Bands and the Shovel-hat?  Distraction
surely, incipience of the "final deliration" enters upon the poor
old English Formulism that has called itself for some two
centuries a Church.  No likelier symptom of its being soon about
to leave the world has come to light in my time.  As if King
Macready should quit Covent-Garden, go down to St. Stephen's, and
insist on saying, _Le roi le veut!_--I read last night the
wonderfulest article to that effect, in the shape of a criticism
on myself, in the _Quarterly Review._  It seems to be by one
Sewell, an Oxford doctor of note, one of the chief men among the
Pusey-and-Newman Corporation.  A good man, and with good notions,
whom I have noted for some years back.  He finds me a very worthy
fellow;  "true, most true,"--except where I part from Puseyism,
and reckon the shovel-hat to be an old bit of felt;  then I am
false, most false.  As the Turks say, _Allah akbar!_

I forget altogether what I said of Landor;  but I hope I did not
put him in the Heraud category:  a cockney windbag is one thing;
a scholar and bred man, though incontinent, explosive, half-true,
is another.  He has not been in town, this year;  Milnes
describes him as _eating_ greatly at Bath, and perhaps even
cooking!  Milnes did get your Letter:  I told you?  Sterling has
the Concord landscape;  mine is to go upon the wall here, and
remind me of many things.  Sterling is busy writing;  he is to
make Falmouth do, this winter, and try to dispense with Italy.
He cannot away with my doctrine of _Silence;_  the good John.  My
Wife has been better than usual all summer;  she begins to shiver
again as winter draws nigh.  Adieu, dear Emerson.  Good be with
you and yours.  I must be far gone when I cease to love you.
"The stars are above us, the graves are under us."  Adieu.

T. Carlyle




LVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, 30 October, 1840

My Dear Friend,--My hope is that you may live until this creeping
bookseller's balance shall incline at last to your side.  My rude
ciphering, based on the last account of this kind which I sent
you in April from J. Munroe & Co., had convinced me that I was to
be in debt to you at this time L40 or more;  so that I actually
bought L40 the day before the "Caledonia" sailed to send you;
but on giving my new accounts to J.M. & Co., to bring the
statement up to this time, they astonished me with the above
written result.  I professed absolute incredulity, but Nichols
labored to show me the rise and progress of all my blunders.
Please to send the account with the last to your Fraser, and have
it sifted.  That I paid, a few weeks since, $481.34, and again,
$28.12, for printing and paper respectively, is true.--C.C.
Little & Co. acknowledge the sale of 82 more copies of the London
Edition _French Revolution_ since the 187 copies of July 1;  but
these they do not get paid for until January 1, and we it seems
must wait as long.  We will see if the New-Year's-day will bring
us more pence.

I received by the "Acadia" a letter from you, which I acknowledge
now, lest I should not answer it more at large on another sheet,
which I think to do.  If you do not despair of American
booksellers send the new proofs of the Lectures when they are in
type to me by John Green, 121 Newgate Street (I believe), to the
care of J. Munroe & Co.  He sends a box to Munroe by every
steamer.  I sent a _Dial,_ No. 2, for you, to Green.  Kennet, I
hear, has failed.  I hope he did not give his creditors my
_Miscellanies,_ which you told me were there.  I shall be glad if
you will draw Cromwell, though if I should choose it would be
Carlyle.  You will not feel that you have done your work until
those devouring eyes and that portraying hand have achieved
England in the Nineteenth Century.  Perhaps you cannot do it
until you have made your American visit.  I assure you the view
of Britain is excellent from New England.

We are all a little wild here with numberless projects of social
reform.  Not a reading man but has a draft of a new Community in
his waistcoat pocket.  I am gently mad myself, and am resolved to
live cleanly.  George Ripley is talking up a colony of
agriculturists and scholars, with whom he threatens to take the
field and the book.  One man renounces the use of animal food;
and another of coin;  and another of domestic hired service;  and
another of the State;  and on the whole we have a commendable
share of reason and hope.

I am ashamed to tell you, though it seems most due, anything of
my own studies, they seem so desultory, idle, and unproductive.
I still hope to print a book of essays this winter, but it cannot
be very large.  I write myself into letters, the last few months,
to three or four dear and beautiful persons, my country-men and
women here.  I lit my candle at both ends, but will now be colder
and scholastic.  I mean to write no lectures this winter.  I hear
gladly of your wife's better health;  and a letter of Jane
Tuckerman's, which I saw, gave the happiest tidings of her.  We
do not despair of seeing her yet in Concord, since it is now but
twelve and a half days to you.

I had a letter from Sterling, which I will answer.  In all love
and good hope for you and yours, your affectionate

R.W. Emerson




LIX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--My answer on this occasion has been delayed above
two weeks by a rigorous, searching investigation into the
procedure of the hapless Book-conveyer, Kennet, in reference to
that copy of the _Miscellanies._  I was deceived by hopes of a
conclusive response from day to day;  not till yesterday did any
come.  My first step, taken long ago, was to address a new copy
of the Book, not to you, luckless man, but to _Lydia_ Emerson,
the fortunate wife;  this copy Green now has lying by him,
waiting for the January Steamer (we sail only once a month in
this season);  before the New Year has got out of infancy the
Lady will be graciously pleased to make a few inches of room on
her bookshelves for this celebrated performance.  And now as to
Kennet, take the brief outcome of some dozen visitations,
judicial interrogatories, searches of documents, and other
piercing work on the part of methodic Fraser, attended with
demurrers, pleadings, false denials, false affirmings, on the
part of innocent chaotic Kennet:  namely, that the said Kennet,
so urged, did in the end of the last week, fish up from his
repositories your very identical Book directed to Munroe's care,
duly booked and engaged for, in May last, but left to repose
itself in the Covent-Garden crypts ever since without disturbance
from gods or men!  Fraser has brought back the Book, and you have
lost it;--and the Library of my native village in Scotland is to
get it;  and not Kennet any more in this world, but Green ever
henceforth is to be our Book Carrier.  There is a history.
Green, it seems, addresses also to Munroe;  but the thing, I
suppose, will now shift for itself without watching.

As to the bibliopolic Accounts, my Friend! we will trust them,
with a faith known only in the purer ages of Roman Catholicism,--
when Papacy had indeed become a Dubiety, but was not yet a
Quackery and Falsehood, was a thing _as_ true as it could manage
to be!  That really may be the fact of this too.  In any case
what signifies it much?  Money were still useful;  but it is not
now so indispensable.  Booksellers by their knavery or their
fidelity cannot kill us or cure us.  Of the truth of Waldo
Emerson's heart to me, there is, God be thanked for it, no doubt
at all.

My Hero-Lectures lie still in Manuscript.  Fraser offers no
amount of cash adequate to be an outward motive;  and inwardly
there is as yet none altogether clear, though I rather feel of
late as if it were clearing.  To fly in the teeth of English
Puseyism, and risk such shrill welcome as I am pretty sure of, is
questionable:  yet at bottom why not?  Dost thou not as entirely
reject this new Distraction of a Puseyism as man can reject a
thing,--and couldst utterly abjure it, and even abhor it,--were
the shadow of a cobweb ever likely to become momentous, the
cobweb itself being _beheaded,_ with axe and block on Tower Hill,
two centuries ago?  I think it were as well to _tell_ Puseyism
that it has something of good, but also much of bad and even
worst.  We shall see.  If I print the thing, we shall surely take
in America again;  either by stereotype or in some other way.
Fear not that!--Do you attend at all to this new _Laudism_ of
ours?  It spreads far and wide among our Clergy in these days;  a
most notable symptom, very cheering to me many ways;  whether or
not one of the fatalest our poor Church of England has ever
exhibited, and betokening swifter ruin to it than any other, I do
not inquire.  Thank God, men do discover at last that there is
still a God present in their affairs, and must be, or their
affairs are of the Devil, naught, and worthy of being sent to the
Devil!  This once given, I find that all is given;  daily
History, in Kingdom and in Parish, is an _experimentum crucis_ to
show what is the Devil's and what not.  But on the whole are we
not the _formalest_ people ever created under this Sun?  Cased
and overgrown with Formulas, like very lobsters with their
shells, from birth upwards;  so that in the man we see only his
breeches, and believe and swear that wherever a pair of old
breeches are there is a man!  I declare I could both laugh and
cry.  These poor good men, merciful, zealous, with many
sympathies and thoughts, there do they vehemently appeal to me,
_Et tu, Brute?_  Brother, wilt thou too insist on the breeches
being old,--not ply a needle among us here?--To the naked
Caliban, gigantic, for whom such breeches would not be a glove,
who is stalking and groping there in search of new breeches and
accoutrements, sure to get them, and to tread into nonentity
whoever hinders him in the search,--they are blind as if they had
no eyes.  Sartorial men;  ninth-parts of a man:--enough of them.

The second Number of the _Dial_ has also arrived some days ago.
I like it decidedly better than the first;  in fact, it is right
well worth being put on paper, and sent circulating;--I find
only, as before that it is still too much of a soul for
circulating as it should.  I wish you could in future contrive to
mark at the end of each Article who writes it, or give me some
general key for knowing.  I recognize Emerson readily;  the rest
are of [Greek] for most part.  But it is all good and very good
as a _soul;_  wants only a body, which want means a great deal!
Your Paper on Literature is incomparably the worthiest thing
hitherto;  a thing I read with delight.  Speak out, my brave
Emerson;  there are  many good men that listen!  Even what you
say of Goethe gratifies me;  it is one of the few things yet
spoken of him from personal insight, the sole kind of things that
should be spoken!  You call him _actual,_ not _ideal;_  there is
truth in that too;  and yet at bottom is not the whole truth
rather this:  The actual well-seen _is_ the ideal?  The _actual,_
what really is and exists:  the past, the present, the future no
less, do all lie there!  Ah yes! one day you will find that this
sunny-looking, courtly Goethe held veiled in him a Prophetic
sorrow deep as Dante's,--all the nobler to me and to you, that he
_could_ so hold it.  I believe this;  no man can _see_ as he
sees, that has not suffered and striven as man seldom did.--
Apropos of _this,_ Have you got Miss Martineau's _Hour and Man?_
How curious it were to have the real History of the Negro
Toussaint, and his _black_ Sansculottism in Saint Domingo,--the
most atrocious form Sansculottism could or can assume!  This of a
"black Wilberforce-Washington," as Sterling calls it, is
decidedly something.  Adieu, dear Emerson:  time presses, paper
is done.  Commend me to your good wife, your good Mother, and
love me as well as you can.  Peace and health under clear winter
skies be with you all.

T. Carlyle

My Wife rebukes me sharply that I have "forgot her love."  She is
much better this winter than of old.

Having mentioned Sterling I should say that he is at Torquay
(Devonshire) for the winter, meditating new publication of Poems.
I work still in Cromwellism;  all but desperate of any feasible
issue worth naming.  I "enjoy bad health" too, considerably!




LX. Carlyle to Mrs. Emerson

Dear Mrs. Emerson,--Your Husband's Letter shall have answer when
some moment of leisure is granted me;  he will wait till then,
and must.  But the beautiful utterance which you send over to me;
melodious as the voice of flutes, of Aeolian Harps borne on the
rude winds so _far,_--this must have answer, some word or
growl of answer, be there leisure or none!  The "Acadia," it
seems, is to return from Liverpool the day after tomorrow.  I
shove my paper-whirlpools aside for a little, and grumble in
pleased response.

You are an enthusiast;  make Arabian Nights out of dull foggy
London Days;  with your beautiful female imagination, shape
burnished copper Castles out of London Fog!  It is very beautiful
of you;--nay, it is not foolish either, it is wise.  I have a
guess what of truth there may be in that;  and you the fair
Alchemist, are you not all the richer and better that you know
the _essential_ gold, and will not have it called pewter or
spelter, though in the shops it is only such?  I honor such
Alchemy, and love it;  and have myself done something in that
kind.  Long may the talent abide with you;  long may I abide to
have it exercised on me!  Except the Annandale Farm where my good
Mother still lives, there is no House in all this world which I
should be gladder to see than the one at Concord.  It seems to
stand as only over the hill, in the next Parish to me, familiar
from boyhood.  Alas! and wide-waste Atlantics roll between;  and
I cannot walk over of an evening!--I never give up the hope of
getting thither some time.  Were I a little richer, were I
a little healthier;  were I this and that--!--One has no
Fortunatus' "Time-annihilating" or even "Space-annihilating Hat":
it were a thing worth having in this world.

My Wife unites with me in all kindest acknowledgments:  she is
getting stronger these last two years;  but is still such a
_sailor_ as the Island hardly parallels:  had she the _Space-
annihilating Hat,_ she too were soon with you.
Your message shall reach Miss Martineau;  my Dame will send it in
her first Letter.  The good Harriet is not well;  but keeps a
very courageous heart.  She lives by the shore of the beautiful
blue Northumbrian Sea;  a "many-sounding" solitude which I often
envy her.  She writes unweariedly, has many friends visiting her.
You saw her _Toussaint l'Ouverture:_  how she has made such a
beautiful "black Washington," or "Washington-Christ-Macready," as
I have heard some call it, of a rough-handed, hard-headed, semi-
articulate gabbling Negro;  and of the horriblest phasis that
"Sansculottism" _can_ exhibit, of a Black Sansculottism, a
musical Opera or Oratorio in pink stockings!  It is very
beautiful.  Beautiful as a child's heart,--and in so shrewd a
head as that.  She is now writing express Children's-Tales, which
I calculate I shall find more perfect.

Some ten days ago there went from me to Liverpool, perhaps there
will arrive at Concord by this very "Acadia," a bundle of Printed
Sheets directed to your Husband:  pray apprise the man of that.
They are sheets of a Volume called _Lectures on Heroes;_  the
Concord Hero gets them without direction or advice of any kind.
I have got some four sheets more ready for him here;  shall
perhaps send them too, along with this.  Some four again more
will complete the thing.  I know not what he will make of it;--
perhaps wry faces at it?

Adieu, dear Mrs. Emerson.  We salute you from this house.  May
all good which the Heavens grant to a kind heart, and the good
which they never _refuse_ to one such, abide with you always.  I
commend myself to your and Emerson's good Mother, to the
mischievous Boys and--all the Household.  Peace and fair Spring-
weather be there!

Yours with great regard,
T. Carlyle




LXI. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Behold Mr. George Nichols's new digest and
exegesis of his October accounts.  The letter seems to me the
most intelligible of the two papers, but I have long been that
man's victim, semi-annually, and never dare to make head against
his figures.  You are a brave man, and out of the ring of his
enchantments, and withal have magicians of your own who can give
spell for spell, and read his incantations backward.  I entreat
you to set them on the work, and convict his figures if you
can.  He has really taken pains, and is quite proud of his
establishment of his accounts.  In a month it will be April, and
be will have a new one to fender.  Little and Brown also in April
promise a payment on _French Revolution,_--and I suppose
something is due from _Chartism._  We will hope that a Bill of
Exchange will yet cross from us to you, before our booksellers
fail.

I hoped before this to have reached my last proofsheet, but shall
have two or three more yet.  In a fortnight or three weeks my
little raft will be afloat.  Expect nothing more of my powers of
construction,--no shipbuilding, no clipper, smack, nor skiff
even, only boards and logs tied together.  I read to some
Mechanics' Apprentices a long lecture on Reform, one evening, a
little while ago.  They asked me to print it, but Margaret Fuller
asked it also, and I preferred the _Dial,_ which shall have the
dubious sermon, and I will send it to you in that.--You see the
bookseller reverendizes me notwithstanding your laudable
perseverance to adorn me with profane titles, on the one hand,
and the growing habit of the majority of my correspondents to
clip my name of all titles on the other.  I desire that you and
your wife will keep your kindness for

R. W. Emerson



LXII. Emerson to Carlyle

Boston, 30 April, 1841

My Dear Carlyle,--Above you have a bill of exchange for one
hundred pounds sterling drawn by T.W. Ward & Co. on the Messrs.
Barings, payable at sight.  Let us hope it is but the first of a
long series.  I have vainly endeavored to get your account to be
rendered by Munroe & Co. to the date of the 1st of April.  It was
conditionally promised for the day of the last steamer (15
April).  It is not ready for that which sails tomorrow and
carries this.  Little & Co. acknowledge a debt of $607.90 due to
you 1st of April, and just now paid me;  and regret that their
sales have been so slow, which they attribute to the dulness of
all trade among us for the last two years.  You shall have the
particulars of their account from Munroe's statement of the
account between you and me.  Munroe & Co. have a long apology for
not rendering their own account;  their book keeper left them at
a critical moment, they were without one six weeks, &c.;--but
they add, if we could give you it, to what use, since we should
be utterly unable to make you any payment at this time?  To what
use, surely?  I am too much used to similar statements from
our booksellers and others in the last few years to be much
surprised;  nor do I doubt their readiness or their power to pay
all their debts at last;  but a great deal of mutual concession
and accommodation has been the familiar resort of our tradesmen
now for a good while, a vice which they are all fain to lay at
the doors of the Government, whilst it belongs in the first
instance, no doubt, to the rashness of the individual traders.
These men I believe to be prudent, honest, and solvent, and that
we shall get all our debt from them at last.  They are not
reckoned as rich as Little and Brown.  By the next steamer they
think they can promise to have their account ready.  I am sorry
to find that we have been driven from the market by the New
York Pirates in the affair of the Six Lectures.  The book was
received from London and for sale in New York and Boston before
my last sheets arrived by the "Columbia."  Appleton in New York
braved us and printed it, and furthermore told us that he intends
to print in future everything of yours that shall be printed in
London,--complaining in rude terms of the monopoly your
publishers here exercise, and the small commissions they allow to
the trade, &c., &c.  Munroe showed me the letter, which certainly
was not an amiable one.  In this distress, then, I beg you, when
you have more histories and lectures to print, to have the
manuscript copied by a scrivener before you print at home, and
send it out to me, and I will keep all Appletons and Corsairs
whatsoever out of the lists.  Not only these men made a book (of
which, by the by, Munroe sends you by this steamer a copy, which
you will find at John Green's, Newgate Street), but the New York
newspapers print the book in chapters, and you circulate for six
cents per newspaper at the corners of all streets in New York and
Boston;  gaining in fame what you lose in coin.--The book is a
good book, and goes to make men brave and happy.  I bear glad
witness to its cheering and arming quality.

I have put into Munroe's box which goes to Green a _Dial_ No. 4
also, which I could heartily wish were a better book.  But
Margaret Fuller, who is a noble woman, is not in sufficiently
vigorous health to do this editing work as she would and should,
and there is no other who can and will.

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




LXIII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Your last letter found me on the southern
border of Yorkshire, whither Richard Milnes had persuaded me with
him, for the time they call "Easter Holidays" here.  I was to
shake off the remnants of an ugly _Influenza_ which still hung
about me;  my little portmanteau, unexpectedly driven in again by
perverse accidents, had stood packed, its cowardly owner, the
worst of all travelers, standing dubious the while, for two weeks
or more;  Milnes offering to take me as under his cloak, I went
with Milnes.  The mild, cordial, though something dilettante
nature of the man distinguishes him for me among men, as men go.
For ten days I rode or sauntered among Yorkshire fields and
knolls;  the sight of the young Spring, new to me these seven
years, was beautiful, or better than beauty.  Solitude itself,
the great Silence of the Earth, was as balm to this weary, sick
heart of mine;  not Dragons of Wantley (so they call Lord
Wharncliffe, the wooden Tory man), not babbling itinerant
Barrister people, fox-hunting Aristocracy, nor Yeomanry Captains
cultivating milk-white mustachios, nor the perpetual racket, and
"dinner at eight o'clock," could altogether countervail the fact
that green Earth was around one and unadulterated sky overhead,
and the voice of waters and birds,--not the foolish speech of
Cockneys at _all_ times!--On the last morning, as Richard and I
drove off towards the railway, your Letter came in, just in time;
and Richard, who loves you well, hearing from whom it was, asked
with such an air to see it that I could not refuse him.  We
parted at the "station," flying each his several way on the wings
of Steam;  and have not yet met again.  I went over to Leeds,
staid two days with its steeple-chimneys and smoke-volcano still
in view;  then hurried over to native Annandale, to see my aged
excellent Mother yet again in this world while she is spared to
me.  My birth-land is always as the Cave of Trophonius to me;  I
return from it with a haste to which the speed of Steam is slow,
--with no smile on my face;  avoiding all speech with men!  It is
not yet eight-and-forty hours since I got back;  your Letter is
among the first I answer, even with a line;  your new Book--But
we will not yet speak of that....

My Friend, I _thank_ you for this Volume of yours;  not for the
copy alone which you send to me, but for writing and printing
such a Book.  _Euge!_ say I, from afar.  The voice of one crying
in the desert;--it is once more the voice of a _man._  Ah me! I
feel as if in the wide world there were still but this one voice
that responded intelligently to my own;  as if the rest were all
hearsays, melodious or unmelodious echoes;  as if this alone were
true and alive.  My blessing on you, good Ralph Waldo!  I read
the Book all yesterday;  my Wife scarcely yet done with telling
me her news.  It has rebuked me, it has aroused and comforted me.
Objections of all kinds I might make, how many objections to
superficies and detail, to a dialect of thought and speech as yet
imperfect enough, a hundred-fold too narrow for the Infinitude it
strives to speak:  but what were all that?  It is an Infinitude,
the real vision and belief of one, seen face to face:  a "voice
of the heart of Nature" is here once more.  This is the one fact
for me, which absorbs all others whatsoever.  Persist, persist;
you have much to say and to do.  These voices of yours which I
likened to unembodied souls, and censure sometimes for having no
body,--how can they have a body?  They are light-rays darting
upwards in the East;  they will yet make much and much to have a
body!  You are a new era, my man, in your new huge country:  God
give you strength, and speaking and silent faculty, to do such a
work as seems possible now for you!  And if the Devil will be
pleased to set all the Popularities _against_ you and evermore
against you,--perhaps that is of all things the very kindest any
_Angel_ could do.

Of myself I have nothing good to report.  Years of sick idleness
and barrenness have grown wearisome to me.  I do nothing.  I
waver and hover, and painfully speculate even now as to health,
and where I shall spend the summer out of London!  I am a very
poor fellow;--but hope to grow better by and by.  Then this
_alluvies_ of foul lazy stuff that has long swum over me may
perhaps yield the better harvest.  _Esperons!_--Hail to all of
you from both of us.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




LXIV. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--About a week ago I wrote to you, after too long
a silence.  Since that there has another Letter come, with a
Draft of L100 in it, and other comfortable items not pecuniary;
a line in acknowledgment of the money is again very clearly among
my duties.  Yesterday, on my first expedition up to Town, I gave
the Paper to Fraser;  who is to present the result to me in the
shape of cash tomorrow.  Thanks, and again thanks.  This L100, I
think, nearly clears off for me the outlay of the second _French
Revolution;_  an ill-printed, ill-conditioned publication, the
prime cost of which, once all lying saved from the Atlantic
whirlpools and hard and fast in my own hand, it was not perhaps
well done to venture thitherward again.  To the new trouble of my
friends withal!  We will now let the rest of the game play itself
out as it can;  and my friends, and my one friend, must not take
more trouble than their own kind feelings towards me will reward.

The Books, the _Dial_ No. 4, and Appleton's pirated _Lectures,_
are still expected from Green.  In a day or two he will send
them:  if not, we will jog him into wakefulness, and remind him
of the _Parcels Delivery Company,_ which carries luggage of all
kinds, like mere letters, many times a day, over all corners of
our Babylon.  In this, in the universal British _Penny Post,_ and
a thing or two of that sort, men begin to take advantage of their
crowded ever-whirling condition in these days, which brings such
enormous disadvantages along with it _un_sought for.--
Bibliopolist Appleton does not seem to be a "Hero,"--except after
his own fashion.  He is one of those of whom the Scotch say,
"Thou wouldst do little for God if the Devil were dead!"  The
Devil is unhappily dead, in that international bibliopolic
province, and little hope of his reviving for some time;
whereupon this is what Squire Appleton does.  My respects to him
even in the Bedouin department, I like to see a complete man, a
clear decisive Bedouin.

For the rest, there is one man who ought to be apprised that I
can now stand robbery a little better;  that I am no longer so
very poor as I once was.  In Fraser himself there do now lie
vestiges of money!  I feel it a great relief to see, for a year
or two at least, the despicable bugbear of Beggary driven out of
my sight;  for _which_ small mercy, at any rate, be the Heavens
thanked.  Fraser himself, for these two editions, One thousand
copies each, of the Lectures and _Sartor,_ pays me down on the
nail L150;  consider that miracle!  Of the other Books which he
is selling on a joint-stock basis, the poor man likewise promises
something, though as yet, ever since New-Year's-day, I cannot
learn what, owing to a grievous sickness of his,--for which
otherwise I cannot but be sorry, poor Fraser within the Cockney
limits being really a worthy, accurate, and rather friendly
creature.  So you see me here provided with bread and water for a
season,--it is but for a season one needs either water or bread,
--and rejoice with me accordingly.  It is the one useful, nay, I
will say the one _innoxious,_ result of all this trumpeting,
reviewing, and dinner-invitationing;  from which I feel it
indispensable to withdraw myself more and more resolutely, and
altogether count it as a thing not there.  Solitude is what I
long and pray for.  In the babble of men my own soul goes all to
babble:  like soil you were forever _screening,_ tumbling over
with shovels and riddles;  in _which_ soil no fruit can grow!  My
trust in Heaven is, I shall yet get away "to some cottage by the
sea-shore";  far enough from all the mad and mad making things
that dance round me here, which I shall then look on only as a
theatrical phantasmagory, with an eye only to the _meaning_ that
lies hidden in it.  You, friend Emerson, are to be a Farmer, you
say, and dig Earth for your living?  Well;  I envy you that as
much as any other of your blessednesses.  Meanwhile, I sit shrunk
together here in a small _dressing-closet,_ aloft in the back
part of the house, excluding all cackle and cockneys;  and,
looking out over the similitude of a May grove (with little brick
in it, and only the minarets of Westminster and gilt cross of St.
Paul's visible in the distance, and the enormous roar of London
softened into an enormous hum), endeavor to await what will
betide.  I am busy with Luther in one Marheinecke's very long-
winded Book.  I think of innumerable things;  steal out westward
at sunset among the Kensington lanes;  would this _May_ weather
last, I might be as well here as in any attainable place.  But
June comes;  the rabid dogs get muzzles;  all is brown-parched,
dusty, suffocating, desperate, and I shall have to run!  Enough
of all that.     On my paper there comes, or promises to come,
as yet simply nothing at all.  Patience;--and yet who can
be patient?

Had you the happiness to see yourself not long ago, in _Fraser's
Magazine,_ classed _nominatim_ by an emphatic earnest man, not
without a kind of splay-footed strength and sincerity,--among the
chief Heresiarchs of the--world?  Perfectly right.  Fraser was
very anxious to know what I thought of the Paper,--"by an
entirely unknown man in the country."  I counseled "that there
was something in him, which he ought to improve by holding his
peace for the next five years."

Adieu, dear Emerson;  there is not a scrap more of Paper.  All
copies of your _Essays_ are out at use;  with what result we
shall perhaps see.  As for me I love the Book and man, and their
noble rustic herohood and manhood:--one voice as of a living man
amid such jabberings of galvanized corpses:  _Ach Gott!_

Yours evermore,
T. Carlyle




LXV. Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, 80 May, 1841

My Dear Friend,--In my letter written to you on the 1st of May
(enclosing a bill of exchange of L100 sterling, which, I hope,
arrived safely) I believe I promised to send you by the next
steamer an account for April.  But the false tardy Munroe & Co.
did not send it to me until one day too late.  Here it is, as
they render it, compiled from Little and Brown's statement and
their own.  I have never yet heard whether you have received
their _Analysis_ or explanation of the last abstract they drew up
of the mutual claims between the great houses of T.C. and R.W.E.,
and I am impatient to know whether you have caused it to be
examined, and whether it was satisfactory.  This new one is based
on that, and if that was incorrect, this must be also.  I am
daily looking for some letter from you, which is perhaps near at
hand.  If you have not written, write me exactly and immediately
on this subject, I entreat you.  You will see that in this sheet
I am charged with a debt to you of $184.29.  I shall tomorrow
morning pay to Mr. James Brown (of Little and Brown), who should
be the bearer of this letter, $185.00, which sum he will pay
you in its equivalent of English coin.  I give Mr. Brown an
introductory letter to you, and you must not let slip the
opportunity to make the man explain his own accounts, if any
darkness hang on them.  In due time, perhaps, we can send you
Munroe, and Nichols also, and so all your factors shall render
direct account of themselves to you.  I believe I shall also make
Brown the bearer of a little book written some time since by a
young friend of mine in a very peculiar frame of mind,--thought
by most persons to be mad,--and of the publication of which I
took the charge.  Mr. Very requested me to send you a copy.--I
had a letter from Sterling, lately, which rejoiced me in all but
the dark picture it gave of his health.  I earnestly wish good
news of him.  When you see him, show him these poems, and ask him
if they have not a grandeur.

When I wrote last, I believe all the sheets of the Six Lectures
had not come to me.  They all arrived safely, although the last
package not until our American pirated copy was just out of press
in New York.  My private reading was not less happy for this
robbery whereby the eager public were supplied.  Odin was all new
to me;  and Mahomet, for the most part;  and it was all good to
read, abounding in truth and nobleness.  Yet, as I read these
pages, I dream that your audience in London are less prepared to
hear, than is our New England one.  I judge only from the tone.
I think I know many persons here who accept thoughts of this vein
so readily now, that, if you were speaking on this shore, you
would not feel that emphasis you use to be necessary.  I have
been feeble and almost sick during all the spring, and have been
in Boston but once or twice, and know nothing of the reception
the book meets from the Catholic Carlylian Church.  One reader
and friend of yours dwells now in my house, and, as I hope, for a
twelvemonth to come,--Henry Thoreau,--a poet whom you may one
day be proud of;--a noble, manly youth, full of melodies and
inventions.  We work together day by day in my garden, and I grow
well and strong.  My mother, my wife, my boy and girl, are all in
usual health, and according to their several ability salute you
and yours.  Do not cease to tell me of the health of your wife
and of the learned and friendly physician.

Yours,
R.W. Emerson




LXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Now that there begins again to be some program
possible of my future motions for some time, I hastily despatch
you some needful outline of the same.

After infinite confused uncertainty, I learn yesternight that
there has been a kind of country-house got for us, at a place
called Annan, on the north shore of the Solway Frith, in my
native County of Dumfries.  You passed through the little Burgh,
I suppose, in your way homeward from Craigenputtock:  it stands
about midway, on the great road, between Dumfries and Carlisle.
It is the place where I got my schooling;--consider what a
_preter_natural significance such a scene has now got for me!  It
is within eight miles of my aged Mother's dwelling-place;  within
riding distance, in fact, of almost all the Kindred I have in the
world.--The house, which is built since my time, and was never
yet seen by me, is said to be a reasonable kind of house.  We get
it for a small sum in proportion to its value (thanks to kind
accident);  the three hundred miles of travel, very hateful to
me, will at least entirely obliterate all traces of _this_ Dust-
Babel;  the place too being naturally almost ugly, as far as a
green leafy place in sight of sea and mountains can be so
nicknamed, the whole gang of picturesque Tourists, Cockney
friends of Nature, &c., &c., who penetrate now by steam, in
shoals every autumn, into the very centre of the Scotch Highlands,
will be safe over the horizon!  In short, we are all bound
thitherward in few days;  must cobble up some kind of gypsy
establishment;  and bless Heaven for solitude, for the sight of
green fields, heathy moors;  for a silent sky over one's head,
and air to breathe which does not consist of coal-smoke, finely
powdered flint, and other beautiful _etceteras_ of that kind
among others!  God knows I have need enough to be left altogether
alone for some considerable while (_forever,_ as it at present
seems to me), to get my inner world, and my poor bodily nerves,
both all torn to pieces, set in order a little again!  After much
vain reluctance therefore;  disregarding many considerations,--
disregarding _finance_ in the front of these,--I am off;  and
calculate on staying till I am heartily _sated_ with country,
till at least the last gleam of summer weather has departed.  My
way of life has all along hitherto been a resolute _staying at
home:_  I find now, however, that I must alter my habits, cost
what it may;  that I cannot live all the year round in London,
under pain of dying or going rabid;--that I must, in fact, learn
to travel, as others do, and be hanged to me!  Wherefore, in
brief, my Friend, our address for the next two or three months is
"Newington Lodge, Annan, Scotland,"--where a letter from Emerson
will be a right pleasant visitor!  _Faustum sit._

My second piece of news, not less interesting I hope, is that
_Emerson's Essays,_ the Book so called, is to be reprinted here;
nay, I think, is even now at press,--in the hands of that
invaluable Printer, Robson, who did the _Miscellanies._  Fraser
undertakes it, "on _half-profits_";--T. Carlyle writing a
Preface,--which accordingly he did (in rather sullen humor,--not
with you!) last night and the foregoing days.  Robson will stand
by the text to the very utmost;  and I also am to read the Proof
sheets.  The edition is of Seven Hundred and Fifty;  which Fraser
thinks he will sell.  With what joy shall I then sack up the
small Ten Pounds Sterling perhaps of "Half-Profits," and remit
them to the man Emerson;  saying:  There, Man!  Tit for tat, the
reciprocity _not_ all on one side!--I ought to say, moreover,
that this was a volunteer scheme of Fraser's;  the risk is all
his, the origin of it was with him:  I advised him to have it
reviewed, as being a really noteworthy Book;  "Write you a
Preface," said he, "and I will reprint it";--to which, after due
delay and meditation;  I consented.  Let me add only, on this
subject, the story of a certain Rio, a French Breton, with
long, distracted, black hair.  He found your Book at Richard
Milnes's, a borrowed copy, and could not borrow it;  whereupon he
appeals passionately to me;  carries off my Wife's copy, this
distracted Rio;  and is to "read it _four_ times" during this
current autumn, at Quimperle, in his native Celtdom!  The man
withal is a _Catholic,_ eats fish on Friday;--a great lion here
when he visits us;  one of the _naivest_ men in the world:
concerning whom nevertheless, among fashionables, there is a
controversy, "Whether he is an Angel, or partially a Windbag and
_Humbug?_"  Such is the lot of loveliness in the World!  A truer
man I never saw;  how _wind_less, how windy, I will not compute
at present.  Me he likes greatly (in spite of my unspeakable
contempt for his fish on Friday);  likes,--but withal is apt
to bore.

Enough, dear Emerson;  and more than enough for a day so hurried.
Our Island is all in a ferment electioneering:  Tories to come
in;--perhaps not to come in;  at all events not to stay long,
without altering their figure much!   I sometimes ask myself
rather earnestly, What is the duty of a citizen?  To be as I have
been hitherto, a pacific _Alien?_  That is the _easiest,_ with my
humor!--Our brave Dame here, just rallying for the _remove,_
sends loving salutations.  Good be with you all always.  Adieu,
dear Emerson.

T. Carlyle

Appleton's Book of _Hero-Worship_ has come;  for which pray thank
Mr. Munroe for me:  it is smart on the surface;  but printed
altogether scandalously!




LXVII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Eight days ago--when I had gone to Nantasket
Beach, to sit by the sea and inhale its air and refresh this puny
body of mine--came to me your letter, all bounteous as all your
letters are, generous to a fault, generous to the shaming of me,
cold, fastidious, ebbing person that I am.  Already in a former
letter you had said too much good of my poor little arid book,--
which is as sand to my eyes,--and now in this you tell me it
shall be printed in London, and graced with a preface from the
man of men.  I can only say that I heartily wish the book were
better, and I must try and deserve so much favor from the kind
gods by a bolder and truer living in the months to come;  such as
may perchance one day relax and invigorate this cramp hand of
mine, and teach it to draw some grand and adequate strokes, which
other men may find their own account and not their good-nature in
repeating.  Yet I think I shall never be killed by my ambition.
I behold my failures and shortcomings there in writing, wherein
it would give me much joy to thrive, with an equanimity which my
worst enemy might be glad to see.  And yet it is not that I am
occupied with better things.  One could well leave to others the
record, who was absorbed in the life.  But I have done nothing.
I think the branch of the "tree of life" which headed to a bud in
me, curtailed me somehow of a drop or two of sap, and so dwarfed
all my florets and drupes.  Yet as I tell you I am very easy in
my mind, and never dream of suicide.  My whole philosophy--which
is very real--teaches acquiescence and optimism.  Only when I see
how much work is to be done, what room for a poet--for any
spiritualist--in this great, intelligent, sensual, and avaricious
America, I lament my fumbling fingers and stammering tongue.  I
have sometimes fancied I was to catch sympathetic activity from
contact with noble persons;  that you would come and see me;
that I should form stricter habits of love and conversation with
some men and women here who are already dear to me,--and at some
rate get off the numb palsy, and feel the new blood sting and
tingle in my fingers' ends.  Well, sure I am that the right word
will be spoken though I cut out my tongue.  Thanks, too, to your
munificent Fraser for his liberal intention to divide the profits
of the _Essays._  I wish, for the encouragement of such a
bookseller, there were to be profits to divide.  But I have no
faith in your public for their heed to a mere book like mine.
There are things I should like to say to them, in a lecture-room
or in a "steeple house," if I were there.  Seven hundred and
fifty copies!  Ah no!

And so my dear brother has quitted the roaring city, and gone
back in peace to his own land,--not the man he left it, but
richer every way, chiefly in the sense of having done something
valiantly and well, which the land, and the lands, and all that
wide elastic English race in all their dispersion, will know and
thank him for.  The holy gifts of nature and solitude be showered
upon you!  Do you not believe that the fields and woods have
their proper virtue, and that there are good and great things
which will not be spoken in the city?  I give you joy in your new
and rightful home, and the same greetings to Jane Carlyle! with
thanks and hopes and loves to you both.

R.W. Emerson

As usual at this season of the year, I, incorrigible spouting
Yankee, am writing an oration to deliver to the boys in one of
our little country colleges, nine days hence.  You will say I do
not deserve the aid of any Muse.  O but if you knew how natural
it is to me to run to these places!  Besides, I always am lured
on by the hope of saying something which shall stick by the good
boys.  I hope Brown did not fail to find you, with thirty-eight
sovereigns (I believe) which he should carry you.




LXVIII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Two days ago your Letter, direct from
Liverpool, reached me here;  only fifteen days after date on the
other side of the Ocean:  one of the swiftest messengers that
have yet come from you.  Steamers have been known to come, they
say, in nine days.  By and by we shall visibly be, what I always
say we virtually are, members of neighboring Parishes;  paying
continual visits to one another.  What is to hinder huge London
from being to universal Saxondom what small Mycale was to the
Tribes of Greece,--a place to hold your [Greek] in?  A meeting of
_All the English_ ought to be as good as one of All the Ionians;
--and as Homeric "equal ships" are to Bristol steamers, so, or
somewhat so, may New York and New Holland be to Ephesus and
Crete, with their distances, relations, and etceteras!--Few
things on this Earth look to me greater than the Future of that
Family of Men.

It is some two months since I got into this region;  my Wife
followed me with her maid and equipments some five weeks ago.
Newington Lodge, when I came to inspect it with eyes, proved to
be too rough an undertaking:  upholsterers, expense and
confusion,--the Cynic snarled, "Give me a whole Tub rather!  I
want nothing but shelter from the elements, and to be let alone
of all men."  After a little groping, this little furnished
cottage, close by the beach of the Solway Frith, was got hold of:
here we have been, in absolute seclusion, for a month,--no
company but the corn-fields and the everlasting sands and brine;
mountains, and thousand-voiced memories on all hands, sending
their regards to one, from the distance.  Daily (sometimes even
nightly!) I have swashed about in the sea;  I have been perfectly
idle, at least inarticulate;  I fancy I feel myself considerably
sounder of body and of mind.  Deeply do I agree with you in the
great unfathomable meaning of a colloquy with the dumb Ocean,
with the dumb Earth, and their eloquence!  A Legislator would
prescribe some weeks of that annually as a religious duty for all
mortals, if he could.  A Legislator will prescribe it for
himself, since he can!  You too have been at Nantasket;  my
Friend, this great rough purple sea-flood that roars under my
little garret-window here, this too comes from Nantasket and
farther,--swung hitherward by the Moon and the Sun.

It cannot be said that I feel "happy" here, which means joyful;--
as far as possible from that.  The Cave of Trophonius could not
be grimmer for one than this old Land of Graves.  But it is a
sadness worth any hundred "happinesses."  _N'en parlons plus._
By the way, have you ever clearly remarked withal what a
despicable function "view-hunting" is.  Analogous to
"philanthropy," "pleasures of virtue," &c., &c.  I for my part,
in these singular circumstances, often find an honestly ugly
country the preferable one.  Black eternal peat-bog, or these
waste-howling sands with mews and seagulls:  you meet at least no
Cockney to exclaim, "How charming it is!"

One of the last things I did in London was to pocket Bookseller
Brown's L38:  a very honest-looking man, that Brown;  whom I was
sorry I could not manage to welcome better.  You asked in that
Letter about some other item of business,--Munroe's or Brown's
account to acknowledge?--something or other that I was to _do:_
I only remember vaguely that it seemed to me I had as good as
done it.  Your Letter is not here now, but at Chelsea.

Three sheets of the _Essays_ lay waiting me at my Mother's, for
correction;  needing as good as none.  The type and shape is the
same as that of late _Lectures on Heroes._  Robson the Printer,
who is a very punctual intelligent man, a scholar withal,
undertook to be himself the corrector of the other sheets.  I
hope you will find them "exactly conformable to the text, _minus_
mere Typographical blunders and the more salient American
spellings (labor for labour, &c.)."  The Book is perhaps just
getting itself subscribed in these very days.  It should have
been out before now:  but poor Fraser is in the country,
dangerously ill, which perhaps retards it a little;  and the
season, at any rate, is at the very dullest.  By the first
conveyance I will send a certain Lady two copies of it.  Little
danger but the Edition will sell;  Fraser knows his own Trade
well enough, and is as much a "desperado" as poor Attila
Schmelzle was!  Poor James, I wish he were well again;  but
really at times I am very anxious about him.--The Book will sell;
will be liked and disliked.  Harriet Martineau, whom I saw in
passing hitherward, writes with her accustomed enthusiasm about
it.  Richard Milnes too is very warm.  John Sterling scolds and
kisses it (as the manner of the man is), and concludes by
inquiring, whether there is any procurable Likeness of Emerson?
Emerson himself can answer.  There ought to be.

--Good Heavens!  Here came my Wife, all in tears, pointing out to
me a poor ship, just tumbled over on a sand-bank on the
Cumberland coast;  men still said to be alive on it,--a Belfast
steamer doing all it can to get in contact with it!  Moments are
precious (say the people on the beach), the flood runs ten miles
an hour.  Thank God, the steamer's boat is out:  "eleven men,"
says a person with a glass, "are saved:  it is an American
timber-ship, coming up without a Pilot."  And now--in ten minutes
more--there lies the melancholy mass alone among the waters,
wreck-boats all hastening towards it, like birds of prey;  the
poor Canadians all up and away towards Annan.  What an end for my
Letter, which nevertheless must end!  Adieu, dear Emerson.
Address to Chelsea next time.  I can say no more.

Yours ever,
T.C.



LXIX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I was in Boston yesterday, and found at
Munroe's your promised packet of the two London Books.  They are
very handsome,--that for my wife is beautiful,--and I am not so
old or so cold but that I can feel the hope and the pleasure that
lie in this gift.  It seems I am to speak in England--great
England--fortified by the good word of one whose word is fame.
Well, it is a lasting joy to be indebted to the wise and
generous;  and I am well contented that my little boat should
swim, whilst it can, beside your great galleys, nor will I allow
my discontent with the great faults of the book, which the rich
English dress cannot hide, to spoil my joy in this fine little
romance of friendship and hope.  I am determined--so help me all
Muses--to send you something better another day.

But no more printing for me at present.  I have just decided to
go to Boston once more, with a course of lectures, which I will
perhaps baptize "On the Times," by way of making once again the
experiment whether I cannot, not only speak the truth, but speak
it truly, or in proportion.  I fancy I need more than another to
speak, with such a formidable tendency to the lapidary style.  I
build my house of boulders;  somebody asked me "if I built of
medals."  Besides, I am always haunted with brave dreams of what
might be accomplished in the lecture-room,--so free and so
unpretending a platform,--a Delos not yet made fast.  I imagine
an eloquence of infinite variety,--rich as conversation can be,
with anecdote, joke, tragedy, epics and pindarics, argument and
confession.  I should love myself wonderfully better if I could
arm myself to go, as you go, with the word in the heart and not
in a paper.

When I was in Boston I saw the booksellers, the children of
Tantalus,--no, but they who trust in them are.  This time, Little
and Brown render us their credit account to T.C. $366 (I think it
was), payable in three months from 1 October.  They had sold all
the London _French Revolutions_ but fifteen copies.  May we all
live until 1 January.  J. Munroe & Co. acknowledge about $180 due
and now rightfully payable to T.C., but, unhappily, not yet paid.
By the help of brokers, I will send that sum more or less in some
English Currency, by the next steamship, which sails in about a
fortnight, and will address it, as you last bade me, to Chelsea.

What news, my dear friend, from your study? what designs ripened
or executed? what thoughts? what hopes? you can say nothing of
yourself that will not greatly interest us all.  Harriet
Martineau, whose sicknesses may it please God to heal! wrote me a
kind, cheerful letter, and the most agreeable notice of your
health and spirit on a visit at her house.  My little boy is five
years old today, and almost old enough to send you his love.

With kindest greetings to Jane Carlyle, I am her and your friend,

R.W.E.




LXX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Above, you have a bill of exchange for forty
pounds sterling, with which sum you must credit the Munroe
account.  The bill, I must not fail to notice, is drawn by a
lover of yours who expresses great satisfaction in doing us this
courtesy;  and courtesy I must think it when he gives me a bill
at sight, whilst of all other merchants I have got only one
payable at some remote day.  ---- is a beautiful and noble youth,
of a most subtle and magnetic nature, made for an artist, a
painter, and in his art has made admirable sketches, but his
criticism, I fancy, was too keen for his poetry (shall I say?);
he sacrificed to Despair, and threw away his pencil.  For the
present, he buys and sells.  I wrote you some sort of letter a
fortnight ago, promising to send a paper like this.  The hour
when this should be despatched finds me by chance very busy with
little affairs.  I sent you by an Italian, Signor Gambardella,--
who took a letter to you with good intent to persuade you to sit
to him for your portrait,--a _Dial,_ and some copies of an
oration I printed lately.  If you should have any opportunity to
send one of them to Harriet Martineau, my debts to her are great,
and I wish to acknowledge her abounding kindness by a letter, as
I must.  I am now in the rage of preparation for my Lectures "On
the Times;"  which begin in a fortnight.  There shall be eight,
but I cannot yet accurately divide the topics.  If it were
eighty, I could better.  In fear lest this sheet should not
safely and timely reach its man, I must now write some duplicate.

Farewell, dear friend.
R.W. Emerson



LXXI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Since that going down of the American Timber-ship
on one of the Banks of the Solway under my window, I do not
remember that you have heard a word of me.  I only added that the
men were all saved, and the beach all in agitation, certain women
not far from hysterics;--and there ended.  I did design to send
you some announcement of our return hither;  but fear there is no
chance that I did it!  About ten days ago the Signor Gambardella
arrived, with a Note and Books from you:  and here now is your
Letter of October 30th;  which, arriving at a moment when I have
a little leisure, draws forth an answer almost instantly.

The Signor Gambardella, whom we are to see a second time tonight
or tomorrow, amuses and interests us not a little.  His face is
the very image of the Classic God Pan's;  with horns, and cloven
feet, we feel that he would make a perfect wood-god;--really,
some of Poussin's Satyrs are almost portraits of this brave
Gambardella.  I will warrant him a right glowing mass of
Southern-Italian vitality,--full of laughter, wild insight,
caricature, and every sort of energy and joyous savagery:  a most
profitable element to get introduced (in moderate quantity), I
should say, into the general current of your Puritan blood over
in New England there!  Gambardella has behaved with magnanimity
in that matter of the Portrait:  I have already sat, to men in
the like case, some four times, and Gambardella knows it is a
dreadful weariness;  I directed him, accordingly, to my last
painter, one Laurence, a man of real parts, whom I wished
Gambardella to know,--and whom I wished to know Gambardella
withal, that he might tell me whether there was any probability
of a _good_ picture by him in case one did decide on encountering
the weariness.  Well:  Gambardella returns with a magnanimous
report that Laurence's picture far transcends any capability of
his;  that whoever in America or elsewhere will have a likeness
of the said individual must apply to Laurence, not to
Gambardella,--which latter artist heroically throws down his
brush, and says, Be it far from me!  The brave Gambardella! if I
can get him this night to dilate a little farther on his Visit to
the _Community of Shakers,_ and the things he saw and felt there,
it will be a most true benefit to me.  Inextinguishable laughter
seemed to me to lie in Gambardella's vision of that Phenomenon,--
the sight and the seer, but we broke out too loud all at once,
and he was afraid to continue.--Alas! there is almost no laughter
going in the world at present.  True laughter is as rare as any
other truth,--the sham of it frequent and detestable, like all
other shams.  I know nothing wholesomer;  but it is rarer even
than Christmas, which comes but once a year, and does always
come once.

Your satisfactions and reflections at sight of your English Book
are such as I too am very thankful for.  I understand them well.
May worse guest never visit the Drawing-room at Concord than that
bound Book.  Tell the good Wife to rejoice in it:  she has all
the pleasure;--to her poor Husband it will be increase of pain
withal:  nay, let us call it increase of valiant labor and
endeavor;  no evil for a man, if he be fit for it!  A man must
learn to digest praise too, and not be poisoned with it:  some of
it _is_ wholesome to the system under certain circumstances;  the
most of it a healthy system will learn by and by to throw into
the slop-basin, harmlessly, without any _trial_ to digest it.  A
thinker, I take it, in the long run finds that essentially he
must ever be and continue _alone;--alone:_  "silent, rest over
him the stars, and under him the graves"!  The clatter of the
world, be it a friendly, be it a hostile world, shall not
intermeddle with him much.  The Book of _Essays,_ however, does
decidedly "speak to England," in its way, in these months;  and
even makes what one may call a kind of appropriate "sensation"
here.  Reviews of it are many, in all notes of the gamut;--of
small value mostly;  as you might see by the two Newspaper
specimens I sent you.  (Did you get those two Newspapers?)  The
worst enemy admits that there are piercing radiances of perverse
insight in it;  the highest friends, some few, go to a very high
point indeed.  Newspapers are busy with extracts;--much
complaining that it is "abstruse," neological, hard to get the
meaning of.  All which is very proper.  Still better,--though
poor Fraser, alas, is dead, (poor Fraser!), and no help could
come from industries of the Bookshop, and Books indeed it seems
were never selling worse than of late months,--I learn that the
"sale of the Essays goes very steadily forward," and will wind
itself handsomely up in due time, we may believe!  So Emerson
henceforth has a real Public in Old England as well as New.  And
finally, my Friend, do _not_ disturb yourself about turning
better, &c., &c.;  write as it is given you, and not till it be
given you, and never mind it a whit.

The new _Adelphi_ piece seems to me, as a piece of Composition,
the best _written_ of them all.  People cry over it:  "Whitherward?
What, What?"  In fact, I do again desiderate some _concretion_ of
these beautiful _abstracta._  It seems to me they will never be
_right_ otherwise;  that otherwise they are but as prophecies yet,
not fulfilments.

The Dial too, it is all spirit-like, aeriform, aurora-borealis
like.  Will no _Angel_ body himself out of that;  no stalwart
Yankee _man,_ with color in the cheeks of him, and a coat on his
back!  These things I _say:_  and yet, very true, you alone can
decide what practical meaning is in them.  Write you always _as_
it is given you,_ be it in the solid, in the aeriform, or
whatsoever way.  There is no other rule given among men.--I have
sent the criticism on Landor to an Editorial Friend of L.'s, by
whom I expect it will be put into the Newspapers here, for the
benefit of Walter Savage;  he is not often so well praised among
us, and deserves a little good praise.

You propose again to send me Moneys,--surprising man!  I am glad
also to hear that that beggarly misprinted _French Revolution_ is
nearly out among you.  I only hope farther your Booksellers will
have an eye on that rascal Appleton, and not let _him_ reprint
and deface, if more copies of the Book turn out to be wanted.
Adieu, dear Emerson!  Good speed to you at Boston, and in all
true things.  I hope to write soon again.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




LXXII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Though I wrote to you very lately, and am in great
haste today, I must lose no time in announcing that the Letter
with the L40 draught came to hand some mornings ago;  and now,
this same morning, a second Letter round by Dumfriesshire, which
had been sent as a duplicate, or substitute in case of accident,
for the former.  It is all right, my friend ----'s paper has got
itself changed into forty gold sovereigns, and lies here waiting
use;  thanks, many thanks!  Sums of that kind come always upon me
like manna out of the sky;  surely they, more emphatically than
any others, are the gift of Heaven.  Let us receive, use, and be
thankful.  I am not so poor now at all;  Heaven be praised:
indeed, I do not know, now and then when I reflect on it, whether
being rich were not a considerably harder problem.  With the
wealth of Rothschild what farther good thing could one get,--if
not perhaps some but to live in, under free skies, in the
country, with a horse to ride and have a little less pain on?
_Angulus ille ridet!_--I will add, for practical purposes in the
future, that it is in general of little or no moment whether an
American Bill be at sight or after a great many days;  that the
paper can wait as conveniently here as the cash can,--if your New
England House and Baring of Old England will forbear bankruptcy
in the mean while.  By the bye, will you tell me some time or
other in _what_ American funds it is that your funded money, you
once gave me note of, now lies?  I too am creditor to America,--
State of Illinois or some such State:  one thousand dollars of
mine, which some years ago I had no use for, now lies there,
paying I suppose for canals, in a very obstructed condition!  My
Brother here is continually telling me that I shall lose it all,
--which is not so bad;  but lose it all by my own unreason,--which
is very bad.  It struck me I would ask where Emerson's money
lies, and lay mine there too, let it live or perish as it likes!

Your _Adelphi_ went straightway off to Miss Martineau with a
message.  Richard Milnes has another;  John Sterling is to have a
third,--had certain other parties seen it first.  For the man
Emerson is become a person to be _seen_ in these times.  I also
gave a _Morning-Chronicle_ Editor your brave eulogy on Landor,
with instructions that it were well worth publishing there, for
Landor's and others' sake.  Landor deserves more praise than he
gets at present;  the world too, what is far more, should hear of
him oftener than it does.  A brave man after his kind,--though
considerably "flamed on from the Hell beneath."  He speaks
notable things;  and at lowest and worst has the faculty too of
holding his peace.

The "Lectures on the Times" are even now in progress?  Good speed
to the Speaker, to the Speech.  Your Country is luckier than most
at this time;  it has still real Preaching;  the tongue of man is
not, whensoever it begins wagging, entirely sure to emit
babblement, twaddlement, sincere--cant, and other noises which
awaken the passionate wish for silence!  That must alter
everywhere the human tongue is no wooden watchman's-rattle or
other _obsolete_ implement;  it continues forever new and useful,
nay indispensable.

As for me and my doings--_Ay de mi!_




LXXIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I enclose a bill of exchange for forty-eight
pounds sterling, payable by Baring Brothers & Co. after sixty
days from the 25th of February.

This Sum is part of a payment from Little and Brown on account of
sales of your London _French Revolution and of Chartism._  As
another part of their payment they asked me if they might not
draw on the estate of James Fraser for a balance due from his
house to them, and pay you so.  I, perhaps unwisely, consented to
make the proffer to you, with the distinct stipulation, however,
that if it should not prove perfectly agreeable to you, and
exactly as available as another form of money, you should
instantly return it to me, and they shall pay me the amount,
$41.57, or L8 12s. 5d. in cash.  My mercantile friend, Abel
Adams, did not admire my wisdom in accepting this bill of Little
and Brown;  so I told them I should probably bring it back to
them, and if there is a shadow of inconvenience in it you will
send it back to me by the next steamer.  For they have no claims
on us.  I decide not to enclose the Little and Brown bill in this
sheet,--but to let it accompany this letter in the same packet.

I grieve to hear that you have bought any of our wretched
Southern Stocks.  In New England all Southern and Southwestern
debt is usually regarded as hopeless, unless the debtor is
personally known.  Massachusetts stock is in the best credit of
any public stock.  Ward told me that it would be safest for you
to keep your Illinois stock, although he could say nothing very
good of it.

Our city banks in Boston are in better credit than the banks in
any other city here, yet one in which a large part of my own
property is invested has failed, for the two last half-years, to
pay any dividend, and I am a poor man until next April, when, I
hope, it will not fail me again.  If you wish to invest money
here, my friend Abel Adams, who is the principal partner in one
of our best houses, Barnard, Adams, & Co., will know how to give
you the best assistance and action the case admits.


My dear friend, you should have had this letter and these
messages by the last steamer;  but when it sailed, my son, a
perfect little boy of five years and three months, had ended his
earthly life.  You can never sympathize with me;  you can never
know how much of me such a young child can take away.  A few
weeks ago I accounted myself a very rich man, and now the poorest
of all.  What would it avail to tell you anecdotes of a sweet and
wonderful boy, such as we solace and sadden ourselves with at
home every morning and evening?  From a perfect health and as
happy a life and as happy influences as ever child enjoyed, he
was hurried out of my arms in three short days by Scarlatina.--We
have two babes yet,--one girl of three years, and one girl of
three months and a week, but a promise like that Boy's I shall
never see.  How often I have pleased myself that one day I should
send to you this Morning Star of mine, and stay at home so gladly
behind such a representative.  I dare not fathom the Invisible
and Untold to inquire what relations to my Departed ones I yet
sustain.  Lidian, the poor Lidian, moans at home by day and by
night.  You too will grieve for us, afar.  I believe I have two
letters from you since I wrote last.  I shall write again soon,
for Bronson Alcott will probably go to London in about a month,
and him I shall surely send to you, hoping to atone by his great
nature for many smaller one, that have craved to see you.  Give
me early advice of receiving these Bills of Exchange.

Tell Jane Carlyle our sorrowing story with much love, and with
all good hope for her health and happiness.  Tell us when you
write, with as much particularity as you can, how it stands with
you, and all your household;  with the Doctor, and the friends;
what you do, and propose to do, and whether you will yet come to
America, one good day?

Yours with love,
R. Waldo Emerson




LXXIV. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Friend,--This is heavy news that you send me;  the
heaviest outward bereavement that can befall a man has overtaken
you.  Your calm tone of deep, quiet sorrow, coming in on the rear
of poor trivial worldly businesses, all punctually despatched and
recorded too, as if the Higher and Highest had not been busy with
you, tells me a sad tale.  What can we say in these cases?  There
is nothing to be said,--nothing but what the wild son of Ishmael,
and every thinking heart, from of old have learned to say:  God
is great!  He is terrible and stern;  but we know also He is
good.  "Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him."  Your bright
little Boy, chief of your possessions here below, is rapt away
from you;  but of very truth he is with God, even as we that yet
live are,--and surely in the way that was best for him, and for
you, and for all of us.--Poor Lidian Emerson, poor Mother!  To
her I have no word.  Such poignant unspeakable grief, I believe,
visits no creature as that of a Mother bereft of her child.  The
poor sparrow in the bush affects one with pity, mourning for its
young;  how much more the human soul of one's Friend!  I cannot
bid her be of comfort;  for there is as yet no comfort.  May good
Influences watch over her, bring her some assuagement.  As the
Hebrew David said, "We shall go to him, he will not return
to us."

I also am here in a house rendered vacant and sacred by Death.  A
sore calamity has fallen on us, or rather has fallen on my poor
Wife (for what am I but like a spectator in comparison?):  she
has lost unexpectedly her good Mother, her sole surviving Parent,
and almost only relative of much value that was left to her.  The
manner too was almost tragic.  We had heard of illness here, but
only of commonplace illness, and had no alarm.  The Doctor
himself, specially applied to, made answer as if there was no
danger:  his poor Patient, in whose character the like of that
intimately lay, had rigorously charged him to do so:  her poor
Daughter was far off, confined to her room by illness of her own;
why alarm her, make her wretched?  The danger itself did seem
over;  the Doctor accordingly obeyed.  Our first intimation of
alarm was despatched on the very day which proved the final one.
My poor Wife, casting sickness behind her, got instantly ready,
set off by the first railway train:  traveling all night, on the
morrow morning at her Uncle's door in Liverpool she is met by
tidings that all is already ended.  She broke down there;  she
is now home again at Chelsea, a cheery, amiable younger Jane
Welsh to nurse her:  the tone of her Letters is still full of
disconsolateness.  I had to proceed hither, and have to stay here
till this establishment can be abolished, and all the sad wrecks
of it in some seemly manner swept away.  It is above three weeks
that I have been here;  not till eight days ago could I so much
as manage to command solitude, to be left altogether alone.  I
lead a strange life;  full of sadness, of solemnity, not without
a kind of blessedness.  I say it is right and fitting that one be
left entirely alone now and then, alone with one's own griefs and
sins, with the mysterious ancient Earth round one, the
everlasting Heaven over one, and what one can make of these.
Poor rustic businesses, subletting of Farms, disposal of houses,
household goods:  these strangely intervene, like matter upon
spirit, every day;--wholesome this too perhaps.  It is many years
since I have stood so in close contact face to face with the
reality of Earth, with its haggard ugliness, its divine beauty,
its depths of Death and of Life.  Yesterday, one of, the stillest
Sundays, I sat long by the side of the swift river Nith;  sauntered
among woods all vocal only with rooks and pairing birds.  The
hills are often white with snow-powder, black brief spring-tempests
rush fiercely down from them, and then again the sky looks forth
with a pale pure brightness,--like Eternity from behind Time.
The _Sky,_ when one thinks of it, is _always_ blue, pure changeless
azure;  rains and tempests are only for the little dwellings where
men abide.  Let us think of this too.  Think of this, thou
sorrowing Mother!  Thy Boy has escaped many showers.

In some three weeks I shall probably be back at Chelsea.  Write
thitherward so soon as you have opportunity;  I will write again
before long, even if I do not hear from you.  The moneys, &c. are
all safe here as you describe:  if Fraser's' Executors make any
demur, your Bookseller shall soon hear of it.

I had begun to write some Book on Cromwell:  I have often begun,
but know not how to set about it;  the most unutterable of all
subjects I ever felt much meaning to lie in.  There is risk yet
that, with the loss of still farther labor, I may have to abandon
it;--and then the great dumb Oliver may lie unspoken forever;
gathered to the mighty _Silent_ of the Earth;  for, I think,
there will hardly ever live another man that will believe in him
and his Puritanism as I do.  To _him_ small matter.

Adieu, my good kind Friend, ever dear to me, dearer now in
sorrow.  My Wife when she hears of your affliction will send a
true thought over to you also.  The poor Lidian!--John Sterling
is driven off again, setting out I think this very day for
Gibraltar, Malta, and Naples.  Farewell, and better days to us.

Your affectionate
T. Carlyle




LXXV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I wrote you a letter from my brother's office
in New York nearly a month ago to tell you how hardly it had
fared with me here at home, that the eye of my home was plucked
out when that little innocent boy departed in his beauty and
perfection from my sight.  Well, I have come back hither to my
work and my play, but he comes not back, and I must simply suffer
it.  Doubtless the day will come which will resolve this, as
everything gets resolved, into light, but not yet.

I write now to tell you of a piece of life.  I wish you to know
that there is shortly coming to you a man by the name of Bronson
Alcott.  If you have heard his name before, forget what you have
heard.  Especially if you have ever read anything to which this
name was attached, be sure to forget that;  and, inasmuch as in
you lies, permit this stranger when he arrives at your gate to
make a new and primary impression.  I do not wish to bespeak any
courtesies or good or bad opinion concerning him.  You may love
him, or hate him, or apathetically pass by him, as your genius
shall dictate;  only I entreat this, that you do not let him go
quite out of your reach until you are sure you have seen him
and know for certain the nature of the man.  And so I leave
contentedly my pilgrim to his fate.

I should tell you that my friend Margaret Fuller, who has edited
our little _Dial_ with such dubious approbation on the part of
you and other men, has suddenly decided a few days ago that she
will edit it no more.  The second volume was just closing;  shall
it live for a third year?  You should know that, if its interior
and spiritual life has been ill fed, its outward and bibliopolic
existence has been worse managed.  Its publishers failed, its
short list of subscribers became shorter, and it has never paid
its laborious editor, who has been very generous of her time and
labor, the smallest remuneration.  Unhappily, to me alone could
the question be put whether the little aspiring starveling should
be reprieved for another year.  I had not the cruelty to kill it,
and so must answer with my own proper care and nursing for its
new life.  Perhaps it is a great folly in me who have little
adroitness in turning off work to assume this sure vexation, but
the _Dial_ has certain charms to me as an opportunity, which I
grudge to destroy.  Lately at New York I found it to be to a
certain class of men and women, though few, an object of
tenderness and religion.  You cannot believe it?

Mr. Lee, who brings you this letter, is the son of one of the
best men in Massachusetts, a man whose name is a proverb among
merchants for his probity, for his sense and his information.
The son, who bears his father's name, is a favorite among all the
young people for his sense and spirit, and has lived always with
good people.

I have read at New York six out of eight lectures on the Times
which I read this winter in Boston.  I found a very intelligent
and friendly audience.  The penny papers reported my lectures,
somewhat to my chagrin when I tried to read them;  many persons
came and talked with me, and I felt when I came away that New
York is open to me henceforward whenever my Boston parish is not
large enough.  This summer, I must try to set in order a few more
chapters from these rambling lectures, one on "The Poet" and one
on "Character" at least.  And now will you not tell me what you
read and write?  Is it Cromwell still?  For I supposed from the
_Westminster_ piece that the laborer must be in that quarter.

I send herewith a new _Dial,_ No. 8, and the last of this
dispensation.  I hope you have received every number.  They have
been sent in order.  I have written no line in this Number.  I
send a letter for Sterling, as I do not know whether his address
is still at Falmouth.  Is he now a preacher?  By the "Acadia" you
should have received a letter of exchange on the Barings, and
another on James Fraser's estate.

With constant good hope for yourself and for your wife, I am
your friend,

R.W. Emerson





LXXVI. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I have lately received from our slow friends,
James Munroe & Co., $246 on account of their sales of the
_Miscellanies,_--and I enclose a bill of Exchange for L51, which
cost $246.50.  It is a long time since I sent you any sketch of
the account itself, and indeed a long time since it was posted,
as the booksellers say;  but I will find a time and a clerk also
for this.

I have had no word from you for a long space.  You wrote me a
letter from Scotland after the death of your wife's mother, and
full of pity for me also;  and since, I have heard nothing.  I
confide that all has gone well and prosperously with you;  that
the iron Puritan is emerging from the Past, in shape and stature
as he lived;  and you are recruited by sympathy and content with
your picture;  and that the sure repairs of time and love and
active duty have brought peace to the orphan daughter's heart.
My friend Alcott must also have visited you before this, and you
have seen whether any relation could subsist betwixt men so
differently excellent.  His wife here has heard of his arrival on
your coast,--no more.

I submitted to what seemed a necessity of petty literary
patriotism,--I know not what else to call it,--and took charge of
our thankless little _Dial,_ here, without subscribers enough to
pay even a publisher, much less any laborer;  it has no penny for
editor or contributor, nothing but abuse in the newspapers, or,
at best, silence;  but it serves as a sort of portfolio, to carry
about a few poems or sentences which would otherwise be
transcribed and circulated;  and always we are waiting when
somebody shall come and make it good.  But I took it, as I said,
and it took me, and a great deal of good time, to a small
purpose.  I am ashamed to compute how many hours and days these
chores consume for me.  I had it fully in my heart to write at
large leisure in noble mornings opened by prayer or by readings
of Plato or whomsoever else is dearest to the Morning Muse, a
chapter on Poetry, for which all readings, all studies, are but
preparation;  but now it is July, and my chapter is rudest
beginnings.  Yet when I go out of doors in the summer night, and
see how high the stars are, I am persuaded that there is time
enough, here or somewhere, for all that I must do;  and the good
world manifests very little impatience.

Stearns Wheeler, the Cambridge tutor, a good Grecian, and the
editor, you will remember, of your American Editions, is going to
London in August probably, and on to Heidelberg, &c.  He means, I
believe, to spend two years in Germany, and will come to see you
on his way;  a man whose too facile and good-natured manners do
some injustice to his virtues, to his great industry and real
knowledge.  He has been corresponding with your Tennyson, and
editing his Poems here.  My mother, my wife, my two little girls,
are well;  the youngest, Edith, is the comfort of my days.  Peace
and love be with you, with you both, and all that is yours.

R. W. Emerson


In our present ignorance of Mr. Alcott's address I advised his
wife to write to your care, as he was also charged to keep you
informed of his place.  You may therefore receive letters for him
with this.




LXXVII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Lest Opportunity again escape me, I will take
her, this time, by the forelock, and write while the matter is
still hot.  You have been too long without hearing of me;  far
longer, at least, than I meant.  Here is a second Letter from
you, besides various intermediate Notes by the hands of Friends,
since that Templand Letter of mine:  the Letter arrived
yesterday;  my answer shall get under way today.

First under the head of business let it be authenticated that the
Letter enclosed a Draft for L51;  a new, unexpected munificence
out of America;  which is ever and anon dropping gifts upon me,--
to be received, as indeed they partly are, like Manna dropped out
of the sky;  the gift of unseen Divinities!  The last money I got
from you changed itself in the usual soft manner from dollars
into sovereigns, and was what they call "all right,"--all except
the little Bill (of Eight Pounds and odds, I think) drawn on
Fraser's Executors by Brown (Little and Brown?);  which Bill the
said Executors having refused for I know not what reason, I
returned it to Brown with note of the dishonor done it, and so
the sum still stands on his Books in our favor.  Fraser's people
are not now my Booksellers, except in the matter of your _Essays_
and a second edition of _Sartor;_  the other Books I got
transferred to a certain pair of people named "Chapman and Hall,
186 Strand";  which operation, though (I understand) it was
transacted with great and vehement reluctance on the part of the
Fraser people, yet produced no _quarrel_ between them and me, and
they still forward parcels, &c., and are full of civility when I
see them:--so that whether this had any effect or none in their
treatment of Brown and his Bill I never knew;  nor indeed, having
as you explained it no concern with Brown's and their affairs,
did I ever happen to inquire.  I avoid all Booksellers;  see them
rarely, the blockheads;  study never to think of them at all.
Book-sales, reputation, profit, &c., &c.;  all this at present is
really of the nature of an encumbrance to me;  which I study, not
without success, to sweep almost altogether out of my head.  One
good is still possible to me in Life, one only:  To screw a
little more work out of myself, my miserable, despicable, yet
living, acting, and so far imperial and celestial _self;_  and
this, God knows, is difficulty enough without any foreign one!

You ask after _Cromwell:_  ask not of him;  he is like to drive
me mad.  There he lies, shining clear enough to me, nay glowing,
or painfully burning;  but far down;  sunk under two hundred
years of Cant, Oblivion, Unbelief, and Triviality of every kind:
through all which, and to the top of all which, what mortal
industry or energy will avail to raise him!  A thousand times I
have rued that my poor activity ever took that direction.  The
likelihood still is that I may abandon the task undone.  I have
bored through the dreariest mountains of rubbish;  I have visited
Naseby Field, and how many other unintelligible fields and
places;  I have &c., &c.:--alas, what a talent have I for getting
into the Impossible!  Meanwhile my studies still proceed;  I even
take a ghoulish kind of pleasure in raking through these old
bone-houses and burial-aisles now;  I have the strangest
fellowship with that huge Genius of DEATH (universal president
there), and catch sometimes, through some chink or other,
glimpses into blessed _ulterior_ regions,--blessed, but as yet
altogether _silent._  There is no use of writing of things past,
unless they can be made in fact things present:  not yesterday at
all, but simply today and what it holds of fulfilment and of
promises is _ours:_  the dead ought to bury their dead, ought
they not?  In short, I am very unfortunate, and deserve your
prayers,--in a quiet kind of way!  If you lose tidings of me
altogether, and never hear of me more,--consider simply that I
have gone to my natal element, that the Mud Nymphs have sucked me
in;  as they have done several in their time!

Sterling was here about the time your Letters to him came:  your
American reprint of his pieces was naturally gratifying him
much.  He seems getting yearly more restless;  necessitated to
find an outlet for himself, unable as yet to do it well.  I think
he will now write Review articles for a while;  which craft is
really, perhaps, the one he is fittest for hitherto.  I love
Sterling:  a radiant creature;  but very restless;--incapable
either of rest or of effectual motion:  aurora borealis and sheet
lightning;  which if it could but _concentrate_ itself, as I
[say] always--!--We had much talk;  but, on the whole, even
his talk is not much better for me than silence at present.
_Me miserum!_

Directly about the time of Sterling's departure came Alcott, some
two weeks after I had heard of his arrival on these shores.  He
has been twice here, at considerable length;  the second time,
all night.  He is a genial, innocent, simple-hearted man, of much
natural intelligence and goodness, with an air of rusticity,
veracity, and dignity withal, which in many ways appeals to one.
The good Alcott:  with his long, lean face and figure, with his
gray worn temples and mild radiant eyes;  all bent on saving the
world by a return to acorns and the golden age;  he comes before
one like a kind of venerable Don Quixote, whom nobody can even
laugh at without loving!....

My poor Wife is still weak, overshadowed with sorrow:  her loss
is great, the loss almost as of the widow's mite;  for except her
good Mother she had almost no kindred left;  and as for friends--
they are not rife in this world.--God be thanked withal they are
not entirely non-extant!  Have I not a Friend, and Friends,
though they too are in sorrow?  Good be with you all.

T. Carlyle.


By far the valuablest thing that Alcott brought me was the
Newspaper report of Emerson's last Lectures in New York.  Really
a right wholesome thing;  radiant, fresh as the _morning;_  a
thing _worth_ reading; which accordingly I clipped from the
Newspaper, and have in a state of assiduous circulation to the
comfort of many.--I cannot bid you quit the _Dial,_ though it,
too, alas, is Antinomian somewhat!  _Perge, perge,_ nevertheless.
--And so now an end.

T. C.



LXXVIII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear. Emerson,--This, morning your new Letter, of the 15th
August, has arrived;  exactly one fortnight old:  thanks to the
gods and steam-demons!  I already, perhaps six weeks ago,
answered your former Letter,--acknowledging the manna-gift of the
L51, and other things;  nor do I think the Letter can have been
lost, for I remember putting it into the Post-Office myself.
Today I am on the eve of an expedition into Suffolk, and full of
petty business:  however, I will throw you one word, were it only
to lighten my own heart a little.  You are a kind friend to me,
and a precious;--and when I mourn over the impotence of Human
Speech, and how each of us, speak or write as he will, has to
stand _dumb,_ cased up in his own unutterabilities, before his
unutterable Brother, I feel always as if Emerson were the man I
could soonest _try_ to speak with,--were I within reach of him!
Well;  we must be content.  A pen is a pen, and worth something;
though it expresses about as much of a _man's_ meaning perhaps as
the stamping of a hoof will express of a horse's meaning;  a very
poor expression indeed!

Your bibliopolic advice about Cromwell or my next Book shall be
carefully attended, if I live ever to write another Book!  But I
have again got down into primeval Night;  and live alone and mute
with the _Manes,_ as you say;  uncertain whether I shall ever
more see day.  I am partly ashamed of myself;  but cannot help
it.  One of my grand difficulties I suspect to be that I cannot
write _two Books at once;_  cannot be in the seventeenth century
and in the nineteenth at one and the same moment;  a feat which
excels even that of the Irishman's bird:  "Nobody but a bird can
be in two places at once!"  For my heart is sick and sore in
behalf of my own poor generation;  nay, I feel withal as if the
one hope of help for it consisted in the possibility of new
Cromwells and new Puritans:  thus do the two centuries stand
related to me, the seventeenth _worthless_ except precisely in so
far as it can be made the nineteenth;  and yet let anybody try
that enterprise!  Heaven help me.--I believe at least that I
ought _to hold my tongue;_  more especially at present.

Thanks for asking me to write you a word in the _Dial._  Had such
a purpose struck me long ago, there have been many things passing
through my head,--march-marching as they ever do, in long drawn,
scandalous Falstaff-regiments (a man ashamed to be seen passing
through Coventry with such a set!)--some one of which, snatched
out of the ragged rank, and dressed and drilled a little, might
perhaps fitly have been saved from Chaos, and sent to the _Dial._
In future we shall be on the outlook.  I love your _Dial,_ and
yet it is with a kind of shudder.  You seem to me in danger of
dividing yourselves from the Fact of this present Universe, in
which alone, ugly as it is, can I find any anchorage, and soaring
away after Ideas, Beliefs, Revelations, and such like,--into
perilous altitudes, as I think;  beyond the curve of perpetual
frost, for one thing!  I know not how to utter what impression
you give me;  take the above as some stamping of the fore-hoof.
Surely I could wish you _returned_ into your own poor nineteenth
century, its follies and maladies, its blind or half-blind, but
gigantic toilings, its laughter and its tears, and trying to
evolve in some measure the hidden Godlike that lies in it;--that
seems to me the kind of feat for literary men.  Alas, it is so
easy to screw one's self up into high and ever higher altitudes
of Transcendentalism, and see nothing under one but the
everlasting snows of Himmalayah, the Earth shrinking to a Planet,
and the indigo firmament sowing itself with daylight stars;  easy
for _you,_ for me:  but whither does it lead?  I dread always, To
inanity and mere injuring of the lungs!--"Stamp, Stamp, Stamp!"--
Well, I do believe, for one thing, a man has no right to say to
his own generation, turning quite away from it, "Be damned!"  It
is the whole Past and the whole Future, this same cotton-spinning,
dollar-hunting, canting and shrieking, very wretched generation
of ours.  Come back into it, I tell you;--and so for the present
will "stamp" no more....

Adieu, my friend;  I must not add a word more.  My Wife is out on
a visit;  it is to bring her back that I am now setting forth for
Suffolk.  I hope to see Ely too, and St. Ives, and Huntingdon,
and various _Cromwelliana._  My blessings on the Concord
Household now and always.  Commend me expressly to your Wife and
your Mother.  Farewell, dear friend.

T. Carlyle




LXXIX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I am in your debt for at least two letters
since I sent you any word.  I should be well content to receive
one of these stringent epistles of bark and steel and mellow wine
with every day's post, but as there is no hope that more will be
sent without my writing to signify that these have come, I hereby
certify that I love you well and prize all your messages.  I read
with special interest what you say of these English studies, and
I doubt not the Book is in steady progress again.  We shall see
what change the changed position of the author will make in the
book.  The first _History_ expected its public;  the second is
written to an expecting people.  The tone of the first was
proud,--to defiance;  we will see if applauses have mitigated the
master's temper.  This time he has a hero, and we shall have a
sort of standard to try, by the hero who fights, the hero who
writes.  Well;  may grand and friendly spirits assist the work in
all hours;  may impulses and presences from that profound world
which makes and embraces the whole of humanity, keep your feet on
the Mount of Vision which commands the Centuries, and the book
shall be an indispensable Benefit to men, which is the surest
fame.  Let me know all that can be told of your progress in it.
You shall see in the last _Dial_ a certain shadow or mask of
yours, "another Richmond," who has read your lectures and
profited thereby.  Alcott sent me the paper from London, but I
do not know the name of the writer.

As for Alcott, you have discharged your conscience of him
manfully and knightly;  I absolve you well...  He is a great man
and was made for what is greatest, but I now fear that he has
already touched what best he can, and through his more than a
prophet's egotism, and the absence of all useful reconciling
talents, will bring nothing to pass, and be but a voice in the
wilderness.  As you do not seem to have seen in him his pure and
noble intellect, I fear that it lies under some new and denser
clouds.

For the _Dial_ and its sins, I have no defence to set up.  We
write as we can, and we know very little about it.  If the
direction of these speculations is to be deplored, it is yet a
fact for literary history, that all the bright boys and girls in
New England, quite ignorant of each other, take the world so, and
come and make confession to fathers and mothers,--the boys that
they do not wish to go into trade, the girls that they do not
like morning calls and evening parties.  They are all religious,
but hate the churches;  they reject all the ways of living of
other men, but have none to offer in their stead.  Perhaps, one
of these days, a great Yankee shall come, who will easily do the
unknown deed.

The booksellers have sent me accounts lately, but--I know not
why--no money.  Little and Brown from January to July had sold
very few books.  I inquired of them concerning the bill of
exchange on Fraser's Estate, which you mention, and they said it
had not been returned to them, but only some information, as I
think, demanded by Fraser's administrator, which they had sent,
and, as they heard nothing again, they suppose that it is allowed
and paid to you.  Inform me on this matter.

Munroe & Co. allow some credits, but charge more debits for
binding, &c., and also allege few sales in the hard times.  I
have got a good friend of yours, a banking man, to promise that
he will sift all the account and see if the booksellers have kept
their promises.  But I have never yet got all the papers in
readiness for him.  I am looking to see if I have matter for new
lectures, having left behind me last spring some half-promises in
New York.  If you can remember it, tell me who writes about
Loyola and Xavier in the _Edinburgh._  Sterling's papers--if he
is near you--are all in Mr. Russell's hands.  I played my part
of Fadladeen with great rigor, and sent my results to Russell,
but have not now written to J. S.

Yours,
R.W.E.




LXXX. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Your Letter finds me here today;  busied with
many things, but not likely to be soon more at leisure;
wherefore I may as well give myself the pleasure of answering it
on the spot.  The Fraser Bill by Brown and Little has come all
right;  the Dumfries Banker apprises me lately that he has got
the cash into his hands.  Pray do not pester yourself with these
Bookseller unintelligibilities:  I suppose their accounts are all
reasonably correct, the cheating, such as it is, done according
to rule:  what signifies it at any rate?  I am no longer in any
vital want of money;  alas, the want that presses far heavier on
me is a want of faculty, a want of _sense;_  and the feeling of
that renders one comparatively very indifferent to money!  I
reflect many times that the wealth of the Indies, the fame of ten
Shakespeares or ten Mahomets, would at bottom do me no good at
all.  Let us leave these poor slaves of the Ingot and slaves
of the Lamp to their own courses,--within a _certain_ extent
of halter!

What you say of Alcott seems to me altogether just.  He is a man
who has got into the Highest intellectual region,--if that be the
Highest (though in that too there are many stages) wherein a man
can believe and discern for himself, without need of help from
any other, and even in opposition to all others:  but I consider
him entirely unlikely to accomplish anything considerable, except
some kind of crabbed, semi-perverse, though still manful
existence of his own;  which indeed is no despicable thing.
His "more than prophetic egoism,"--alas, yes!  It is of such
material that Thebaid Eremites, Sect-founders, and all manner of
cross-grained fanatical monstrosities have fashioned themselves,
--in very _high,_ and in the highest regions, for that matter.
Sect-founders withal are a class I do not like.  No truly great
man, from Jesus Christ downwards, as I often say, ever founded a
Sect,--I mean wilfully intended founding one.  What a view must a
man have of this Universe, who thinks "_he_ can swallow it all,"
who is not doubly and trebly happy that he can keep it from
swallowing him!  On the whole, I sometimes hope we have now done
with Fanatics and Agonistic Posture-makers in this poor world:
it will be an immense improvement on the Past;  and the "New
Ideas," as Alcott calls them, will prosper greatly the better on
that account!  The old gloomy Gothic Cathedrals were good;  but
the great blue Dome that hangs over all is better than any
Cologne one.--On the whole, do not tell the good Alcott a word of
all this;  but let him love me as he can, and live on vegetables
in peace;  as I, living _partly_ on vegetables, will continue to
love him!

The best thing Alcott did while he staid among us was to
circulate some copies of your _Man the Reformer._  I did not get
a copy;  I applied for one, so soon as I knew the right fountain;
but Alcott, I think, was already gone.  And now mark,--for this I
think is a novelty, if you do not already know it:  Certain
Radicals have reprinted your Essay in Lancashire, and it is
freely circulating there, and here, as a cheap pamphlet, with
excellent acceptance so far as I discern.  Various Newspaper
reviews of it have come athwart me:  all favorable, but all too
shallow for sending to you.  I myself consider it a _truly
excellent_ utterance;  one of the best words you have ever
spoken.  Speak many more such.  And whosoever will distort them
into any "vegetable" or other crotchet,--let it be at his own
peril;  for the word itself is _true;_  and will have to make
itself a _fact_ therefore;  though not a distracted _abortive_
fact, I hope!  _Words_ of that kind are not born into Facts in
the _seventh month;_  well if they see the light full-grown (they
and their adjuncts) in the _second century;_  for old Time is a
most deliberate breeder!--But to speak without figure, I have
been very much delighted with the clearness, simplicity, quiet
energy and veracity of this discourse; and also with the fact of
its spontaneous appearance here among us.  The prime mover of the
Printing, I find, is one Thomas Ballantyne, editor of a
Manchester Newspaper, a very good, cheery little fellow, once
a Paisley weaver as he informs me,--a great admirer of all
worthy things.

My paper is so fast failing, let me tell you of the writer on
Loyola.  He is a James Stephen, Head Under-Secretary of the
Colonial Office,--that is to say, I believe, real governor of the
British Colonies, so far as they have any governing.  He is of
Wilberforce's creed, of Wilberforce's kin;  a man past middle
age, yet still in full vigor;  reckoned an enormous fellow for
"despatch of business," &c., especially by Taylor (_van
Artevelde_) and others who are with him or under him in Downing
Street.... I regard the man as standing on the confines of Genius
and Dilettantism,--a man of many really good qualities, and
excellent at the despatch of business.  There we will leave
him.  --A Mrs. Lee of Brookline near you has made a pleasant
Book about Jean Paul, chiefly by excerpting.  I am sorry to
find Gunderode & Co. a decided weariness!  Cromwell--Cromwell?
Do not mention such a word, if you love me!  And yet--Farewell,
my Friend, tonight!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle

I will apprise Sterling before long:  he is at Falmouth, and
well;  urging me much to start a Periodical here!

Gambardella promises to become a real Painter;  there is a glow
of real fire in the wild southern man:  next to no _articulate_
intellect or the like, but of inarticulate much, or I mistake.
He has tried to paint _me_ for you;  but cannot, he says!



LXXXI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--I know not whose turn it is to write;  though a
suspicion has long attended me that it was yours, and above all
an indisputable wish that you would do it:  but this present is a
cursory line, all on business,--and as usual all on business of
my own.

I have finished a Book, and just set the Printer to it;  one
solid volume (rather bigger than one of the _French Revolution_
Volumes, as I compute);  it is a somewhat fiery and questionable
"Tract for the Times," _not_ by a Puseyite, which the terrible
aspect of things here has forced from me,--I know not whether as
preliminary to _Oliver_ or not;  but it had gradually grown to be
the preliminary of anything possible for me:  so there it is
written;  and I am a very sick, but withal a comparatively very
free man.  The Title of the thing is to be _Past and Present:_
it is divided into Four Books, "Book I. Proem," "Book II. The
Ancient Monk," "Book III. The Modern Worker," and "Book IV.
Horoscope" (or some such thing):--the size of it I guessed
at above.

The practical business, accordingly, is:  How to cut out that New
York scoundrel, who fancies that because there is no gallows it
is permitted to steal?  I have a distinct desire to do that;--
altogether apart from the money to be gained thereby.  A friend's
goodness ought not to be frustrated by a scoundrel destitute of
gallows.--You told me long since how to do the operation;  and
here, according to the best way I had of fitting your scheme into
my materials, is my way of attempting it.

The Book will not be out here for six good weeks from this date;
it could be kept back for a week or two longer, if that were
indispensable:  but I hope it may not.  In three weeks, half of
it will be printed;  I, in the meanwhile, get a correct
manuscript Copy of the latter half made ready:  joining the
printed sheets and this manuscript, your Bookseller will have a
three weeks' start of any rival, if I instantly despatch the
Parcel to him.  Will this do? this with the announcement of the
Title as given above?  Pray write to me straightway, and say.
Your answer will be here before we can publish;  and the Packet
of Proof-sheets and Manuscript may go off whether there be word
from you or none.--And so enough of _Past and Present._  And
indeed enough of all things, for my haste is excessive in
these hours.

The last _Dial_ came to me about three weeks ago _as a
Post-Letter,_ charged something like a guinea of postage, if
I remember;  so it had to be rejected, and I have not yet seen
that Number;  but will when my leeway is once brought up a little
again.  The two preceding Numbers were, to a marked extent, more
like life than anything I had seen before of the _Dial._  There
was not indeed anything, except the Emersonian Papers alone,
which I know by the first ring of them on the tympanum of the
mind, that I properly speaking _liked;_  but there was much that
I did not dislike, and did half like;  and I say, "_I fausto
pede;_  that will decidedly do better!"  By the bye, it were as
well if you kept rather a strict outlook on Alcott and his
English _Tail,_--I mean so far as we here have any business with
it.  Bottomless imbeciles ought not to be seen in company  with
Ralph Waldo Emerson, who has already men listening to him on this
side of the water.  The "Tail" has an individual or two of that
genus,--and the rest is mainly yet undecided.  For example, I
knew old --- myself;  and can testify, if you will believe me,
that few greater blockheads (if "blockhead" may mean "exasperated
imbecile" and the ninth part of a thinker) broke the world's
bread in his day.  Have a care of such!  I say always to myself,
--and to you, which you forgive me.

Adieu, my dear Emerson.  May a good Genius guide you;  for you
are _alone, alone;_  and have a steep pilgrimage to make,--
leading _high,_ if you do not slip or stumble!

Ever your affectionate,
T. Carlyle



LXXXII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Carlyle,--Along with this Letter there will go from
Liverpool, on the 4th instant, the promised Parcel, complete Copy
of the Book called _Past and Present,_ of which you already had
two simultaneous announcements.  The name of the Steam Packet, I
understand, is the "Britannia."  I have addressed the Parcel to
the care of "Messrs. Little and Brown, Booksellers, Boston," with
your name atop:  I calculate it will arrive safe enough.

About one hundred pages of the Manuscript Copy have proved
superfluous, the text being there also in a printed shape;  I had
misestimated the Printer's velocity;  I was anxious too that
there should be no failure as to time.  The Manuscript is very
indifferent in that section of it;  the damage therefore is
smaller:  your press-corrector can acquaint himself with the
_hand,_ &c. by means of it.  A poor young governess, confined to
a horizontal posture, and many sad thoughts, by a disease of the
spine, was our artist in that part of the business:  her writing
is none of the distinctest;  but it was a work of Charity to give
it her.  I hope the thing is all as correct as I could make it.
I do not bethink me of anything farther I have to add in the way
of explanation.

In fact, my prophecy rather is at present that the gibbetless
thief at New York, will beat us after all!  Never mind if be do.
To say truth, I myself shall almost be glad:  there has been a
botheration in this anxious arrangement of parts correcting of
scrawly manuscript copies of what you never wished to read more,
and insane terror withal of having your own Manuscript burnt or
lost,--that has exceeded my computation.  Not to speak of this
trouble in which I involve you, my Friend;  which, I truly
declare, makes me ashamed!  True one _is_ bound to resist the
Devil in all shapes;  if a man come to steal from you, you will
put on what locks and padlocks are at hand, and not on the whole
say, "Steal, then!"  But if the locks prove insufficient, and the
thief do break through,--that side of the alternative also will
suit you very well;  and, with perhaps a faint prayer for gibbets
when they are necessary, you will say to him, next time, "_Macte
virtute,_ my man."

All is in a whirl with me here today;  no other topic but this
very poor one can be entered upon.  I hope for a letter from your
own hand soon, and some news about still more interesting matters.

Adieu, my Friend;  I feel still as if, in several senses, you
stood alone with me under the sky at present!



LXXXIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--It is a pleasure to set your name once more at
the head of a sheet.  It signifies how much gladness, how much
wealth of being, that the good, wise, man-cheering, man-helping
friend, though unseen, lives there yonder, just out of sight.
Your star burns there just below our eastern horizon, and fills
the lower and upper air with splendid and splendescent auroras.
By some refraction which new lenses or else steamships shall
operate, shall I not yet one day see again the disk of benign
Phosphorus?  It is a solid joy to me, that whilst you work for
all, you work for me and with me, even if I have little to write,
and seldom write your name.

Since I last wrote to you, I found it needful, if only for the
household's sake, to set some new lectures in order, and go to
new congregations of men.  I live so much alone, shrinking almost
cowardly from the contact of worldly and public men, that I need
more than others to quit home sometimes, and roll with the river
of travelers, and live in hotels.  I went to Baltimore, where I
had an invitation, and read two lectures on New England.  On my
return, I stopped at Philadelphia, and, my Course being now grown
to four lectures, read them there.  At New York, my snowball was
larger, and I read five lectures on New England.  1. Religion;
2. Trade;  3. Genius, Manners and Customs;  4. Recent literary
and spiritual influences from abroad;  5. Domestic spiritual
history.--Perhaps I have not quite done with them yet, but may
make them the block of a new and somewhat larger structure for
Boston, next winter.  The newspaper reports of them in New York
were such offensive misstatements, that I could not send you, as
I wished, a sketch.  Between my two speeches at Baltimore, I went
to Washington, thirty-seven miles, and spent four days.  The two
poles of an enormous political battery, galvanic coil on coil,
self-increased by series on series of plates from Mexico to
Canada, and from the sea westward to the Rocky Mountains, here
meet and play, and make the air electric and violent.  Yet one
feels how little, more than how much, man is represented there.
I think, in the higher societies of the Universe, it will turn
out that the angels are molecules, as the devils were always
Titans, since the dulness of the world needs such mountainous
demonstration, and the virtue is so modest and concentrating.

But I must not delay to acknowledge the arrival of your Book.  It
came ten or eleven days ago, in the "Britannia," with the three
letters of different dates announcing it.--I have read the
superfluous hundred pages of manuscript, and find it only too
popular.  Beside its abundance of brilliant points and proverbs,
there is a deep, steady tide taking in, either by hope or by
fear, all the great classes of society,--and the philosophic
minority also, by the powerful lights which are shed on the
phenomenon.  It is true contemporary history, which other books
are not, and you have fairly set solid London city aloft, afloat
in bright mirage in the air.  I quarrel only with the popular
assumption, which is perhaps a condition of the Humor itself,
that the state of society is a new state, and was not the same
thing in the days of Rabelais and of Aristophanes, as of Carlyle.
Orators always allow something to masses, out of love to their
own art, whilst austere philosophy will only know the particles.
This were of no importance, if the historian did not so come to
mix himself in some manner with his erring and grieving nations,
and so saddens the picture;  for health is always private and
original, and its essence is in its unmixableness.--But this
Book, with all its affluence of wit, of insight, and of daring
hints, is born for a longevity which I will not now compute.--In
one respect, as I hinted above, it is only too good, so sure of
success, I mean, that you are no longer secure of any respect to
your property in our freebooting America.

You must know that the cheap press has, within a few months, made
a total change in our book markets.  Every English book of any
name or credit is instantly converted into a newspaper or coarse
pamphlet, and hawked by a hundred boys in the streets of all of
our cities for 25, 18, or 12 cents;  Dickens's Notes for 12
cents, _Blackwood's Magazine_ for 18 cents, and so on.  Three or
four great New York and Philadelphia printing-houses do this
work, with hot competition.  One prints Bulwer's novel yesterday,
for 35 cents;  and already, in twenty-four hours, another has a
coarser edition of it for 18 cents, in all thoroughfares.--What
to do with my sealed parcel of manuscripts and proofs?  No
bookseller would in these perilous circumstances offer a dollar
for my precious parcel.  I inquired of the lawyers whether I
could not by a copyright protect my edition from piracy until an
English copy arrived, and so secure a sale of a few weeks.  They
said, no;  yet advised the taking a certificate of copyright,
that we might try the case if we wished.  After much consulting
and balancing for a few hours, I decided to print, as heretofore,
on our own account, an edition, but cheap, to make the temptation
less, to retail at seventy-five cents.  I print fifteen hundred
copies, and announce to the public that it is your edition, and
all good men must buy this.  I have written to the great
Reprinters, namely to Park Benjamin, and to the Harpers, of New
York, to request their forbearance;  and have engaged Little and
Brown to publish, because, I think, they have something more of
weight with Booksellers, and are a little less likely to be
invaded than Munroe.  If we sell a thousand copies at seventy-five
cents, it will only yield you about two hundred dollars;  if we
should be invaded, we can then afford to sell the other five
hundred copies at twenty-five cents, without loss.  In thus
doing, I involve you in some risk;  but it was the best course
that occurred.--Hitherto, the _Miscellanies_ have not been
reprinted in the cheap forms;  and in the last year, James Munroe
& Co. have sold few copies;  all books but the cheapest being
unsold in the hard times;  something has however accrued to your
credit there.  J.M. & Co. fear that, if the new book is pirated
at New York and the pirate prospers, instantly the _Miscellanies_
will be plundered.  We will hope better, or at least exult
in that which remains, to wit, a Worth unplunderable, yet
infinitely communicable.

I have hardly space left to say what I would concerning the
_Dial._  I heartily hoped I had done with it, when lately our
poor, good, publishing Miss Peabody,... wrote me that its
subscription would not pay its expenses (we all writing for
love).  But certain friends are very unwilling it should die, and
I a little unwilling, though very unwilling to be the life of it,
as editor.  And now that you are safely through your book, and
before the greater Sequel rushes to its conclusion, send me, I
pray you, that short chapter which hovers yet in the limbo of
contingency, in solid letters and points.  Let it be, if that is
readiest, a criticism on the _Dial,_ and this too Elysian race,
not blood, and yet not ichor.--Let Jane Carlyle be on my part,
and, watchful of his hours, urge the poet in the golden one.  I
think to send you a duplicate of the last number of the _Dial_ by
Mr. Mann, who with his bride (sister of the above-mentioned Miss
Peabody) is going to London and so to Prussia.  He is little
known to me, but greatly valued as a philanthropist in this
State.  I must go to work a little more methodically this summer,
and let something grow to a tree in my wide straggling shrubbery.
With your letters came a letter from Sterling, who was too noble
to allude to his books and manuscript sent hither, and which
Russell all this time has delayed to print;  I know not why, but
discouraged, I suppose, in these times by booksellers.  I must
know precisely, and write presently to J.S.

Farewell.
R.W. Emerson




LXXXIV. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--The bearer of this is Mr. Macready, our celebrated
Actor, now on a journey to America, who wishes to know you.  In
the pauses of a feverish occupation which he strives honestly to
make a noble one, this Artist, become once more a man, would like
well to meet here and there a true American man.  He loves Heroes
as few do;  and can recognize them, you will find, whether they
have on the _Cothurnus_ or not.  I recommend him to you;  bid
you forward him as you have opportunity, in this department of
his pilgrimage.

Mr. Macready's deserts to the English Drama are notable here to
all the world;  but his dignified, generous, and every-way
honorable deportment in private life is known fully, I believe,
only to a few friends.  I have often said, looking at him as a
manager of great London theatres, "This Man, presiding over the
unstablest, most chaotic province of English things, is the one
public man among us who has dared to take his stand on what he
understood to be _the truth,_ and expect victory from that:  he
puts to shame our Bishops and Archbishops."  It is literally so.

With continued kind wishes, yours as of old.
T. Carlyle




LXXXV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I seize the occasion of having this morsel of
paper for twenty-five pounds sterling from the booksellers to
send you, (and which fail not to find enclosed, as clerks say,)
to inquire whether you still exist in Chelsea, London, and what
is the reason that my generous correspondent has become dumb for
weary months.  I must go far back to resume my thread.  I think
in April last I received your Manuscript, &c. of the Book, which
I forthwith proceeded to print, after some perplexing debate with
the booksellers, as I fully informed you in my letter of April or
beginning of May.  Since that time I have had no line or word
from you.  I must think that my letter did not reach you, or that
you have written what has never come to me.  I assure myself that
no harm has befallen you, not only because you do not live in a
corner, and what chances in your dwelling will come at least
to my ears, but because I have read with great pleasure the
story of Dr. Francia, which gave the best report of your health
and vivacity.

I wrote you in April or May an account of the new state of things
which the cheap press has wrought in our book market, and
specially what difficulties it put in the way of our edition of
_Past and Present._  For a few weeks I believed that the letters
I had written to the principal New York and Philadelphia
booksellers, and the Preface, had succeeded in repelling the
pirates.  But in the fourth or fifth week appeared a mean edition
in New York, published by one Collyer (an unknown person and
supposed to be a mask of some other bookseller), sold for twelve
and one half cents, and of this wretched copy several thousands
were sold, whilst our seventy-five cents edition went off slower.
There was no remedy, and we must be content that there was no
expense from our edition, which before September had paid all its
cost, and since that time has been earning a little, I believe.
I am not fairly entitled to an account of the book from the
publishers until the 1st of January.... I have never yet done
what I have thought this other last week seriously to do, namely,
to charge the good and faithful E.P. Clark, a man of accounts as
he is a cashier in a bank, with the total auditing and analyzing
of these accounts of yours.  My hesitation has grown from the
imperfect materials which I have to offer him to make up so long
a story.  But he is a good man, and, do you know it? a Carlylese
of that intensity that I have often heard he has collected a sort
of album of several volumes, containing illustrations of every
kind, historical, critical, &c., to the _Sartor._  I must go to
Boston and challenge him.  Once when I asked him, he seemed
willing to assume it.  No more of accounts tonight.

I send you by this ship a volume of translations from Dante, by
Doctor Parsons of Boston, a practising dentist and the son of a
dentist.  It is his gift to you.  Lately went Henry James to
you with a letter from me.  He is a fine companion from his
intelligence, valor, and worth, and is and has been a very
beneficent person as I learn.  He carried a volume of poems from
my friend and nearest neighbor, W. Ellery Channing, whereof give
me, I pray you, the best opinion you can.  I am determined he
shall be a poet, and you must find him such.  I have too many
things to tell you to begin at the end of this sheet, which after
all this waiting I have been compelled to scribble in a corner,
with company waiting for me.  Send me instant word of yourself
if you love me, and of those whom you love, and so God keep you
and yours.

R. Waldo Emerson




LXXXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--It is a long weary time since I have had the
satisfaction of the smallest dialogue with you.  The blame is all
my own;  the reasons would be difficult to give,--alas, they are
properly no-reasons, children not of _Something,_ but of mere
Idleness, Confusion, Inaction, Inarticulation, of _Nothing_ in
short!  Let us leave them there, and profit by the hour which
yet is.

I ran away from London into Bristol and, South Wales, when the
heats grew violent, at the end of June.  South Wales, North
Wales, Lancashire, Scotland:  I roved about everywhere seeking
some Jacob's-pillow on which to lay my head, and dream of things
heavenly;--yes, that at bottom was my modest prayer, though I
disguised it from myself and the result was, I could find no
pillow at all;  but sank into ever meaner restlessness, blacker
and blacker biliary gloom, and returned in the beginning of
September thoroughly eclipsed and worn out, probably the weariest
of all men living under the sky.  Sure enough I have a fatal
talent of converting all Nature into Preternaturalism for myself:
a truly horrible Phantasm-Reality it is to me;  what of heavenly
radiances it has, blended in close neighborhood, in intimate
union, with the hideousness of Death and Chaos;--a very ghastly
business indeed!  On the whole, it is better to hold one's peace
about it.  I flung myself down on sofas here,--for my little Wife
had trimmed up our little dwelling-place into quite glorious
order in my absence, and I had only to lie down:  there, in
reading books, and other make-believe employments, I could at
least keep silence, which was an infinite relief.  Nay,
gradually, as indeed I anticipated, the black vortexes and
deluges have subsided;  and now that it is past, I begin to feel
myself better for my travels after all.  For one thing,
articulate speech having returned to me,--you see what use I make
of it.

On the table of the London Library, voted in by some unknown
benefactor whom I found afterwards to be Richard Milnes, there
lay one thing highly gratifying to me:  the last two Numbers of
the _Dial._  It is to be one of our Periodicals henceforth;  the
current Number lies on the Table till the next arrive;  then the
former goes to the Binder;  we have already, in a bound volume,
all of it that Emerson has had the editing of.  This is right.
Nay, in Edinburgh, and indeed wherever ingenuous inquisitive
minds were met with, I have to report that the said Emerson could
number a select and most loving public;  select, and I should say
fast growing:  for good and indifferent reasons it may behove the
man to assure himself of this.  Farther, to the horror of poor
Nickerson (Bookseller Fraser's Successor), a certain scoundrel
interloper here has reprinted _Emerson's Essays_ on grayish
paper, to be sold at two shillings,--distracting Nickerson with
the fear of change!  I was glad at this, if also angry:  it
indicates several things. Nickerson has taken his measures, will
reduce the price of his remaining copies;  indeed, he informs me
the best part of his edition was already sold, and he has even
some color of money due from England to Emerson through me!  With
pride enough will I transmit this mournful, noble peculium:  and
after that, as I perceive, such chivalrous international doings
must cease between us.  _Past and Present,_ some one told me,
was, in spite of all your precautions, straightway sent forth in
modest gray, and your benevolent speculation ruined.  Here too,
you see, it is the same.  Such chivalries, therefore, are now
impossible;  for myself I say, "Well, let them cease;  thank God
they once were, the Memory of that can never cease with us!"

In this last Number of the _Dial_ which by the bye your
Bookseller never forwarded to me, I found one little Essay, a
criticism on myself, which, if it should do me mischief, may the
gods forgive you for!  It is considerably the most dangerous
thing I have read for some years.  A decided likeness of myself
recognizable in it, as in the celestial mirror of a friend's
heart;  but so enlarged, exaggerated, all _transfigured,_--the
most delicious, the most dangerous thing!  Well, I suppose I must
try to assimilate it also, to turn it also to good, if I be able.
Eulogies, dyslogies, in which one finds no features of one's own
natural face, are easily dealt with;  easily left unread, as
stuff for lighting fires, such is the insipidity, the wearisome
_non_entity of pabulum like that:  but here is another sort of
matter!  "The beautifulest piece of criticism I have read for
many a day," says every one that speaks of it.  May the gods
forgive you!--I have purchased a copy for three shillings, and
sent it to my Mother:  one of the _indubitablest_ benefits I
could think of in regard to it.

There have been two friends of yours here in these very days:
Dr. Russell, just returning from Paris;  Mr. Parker, just bound
thither.  We have seen them rather oftener than common, Sterling
being in town withal.  They are the best figures of strangers we
have had for a long time;  possessions, both of them, to fall in
with in this pilgrimage of life.  Russell carries friendliness in
his eyes, a most courteous, modest, intelligent man;  an English
intelligence too, as I read, the best of it lying unspoken, not
as a logic but as an instinct.  Parker is a most hardy, compact,
clever little fellow, full of decisive utterance, with humor and
good humor;  whom I like much.  They shine like suns, these two,
amid multitudes of watery comets and tenebrific constellations,
too sorrowful without such admixture on occasion!

As for myself, dear Emerson, you must ask me no questions till--
alas, till I know not when!  After four weary years of the most
unreadable reading, the painfulest poking and delving, I have
come at last to the conclusion--that I must write a Book on
Cromwell;  that there is no rest for me till I do it.  This point
fixed, another is not less fixed hitherto, That a Book on
Cromwell is _impossible._  Literally so:  you would weep for me
if you saw how, between these two adamantine certainties, I am
whirled and tumbled.  God only knows what will become of me in
the business.  Patience, Patience!

By the bye, do you know a "Massachusetts Historical Society," and
a James Bowdoin, seemingly of Boston?  In "Vol. II. third series"
of their _Collections,_ lately I met with a disappointment almost
ludicrous.  Bowdoin, in a kind of dancing, embarrassed style,
gives long-winded, painfully minute account of certain precious
volumes, containing "Notes of the Long Parliament," which now
stand in the New York Library;  poises them in his assaying
balance, speculates, prophesies, inquires concerning them:  to me
it was like news of the lost Decades of Livy.  Good Heavens, it
soon became manifest that these precious Volumes are nothing
whatever but a wretched broken old dead manuscript copy of part
of our printed _Commons Journals!_ printed since 1745, and known
to all barbers!  If the Historical Society desired it, any Member
of Parliament could procure them the whole stock, _Lords and
Commons,_ a wheelbarrowful or more, with no cost but the
carriage.  Every Member has the right to demand a copy, and few
do it, few will let such a mass cross their door-threshold!  This
of Bowdoin's is a platitude of some magnitude.--Adieu, dear
Emerson.  Rest not, haste not;  you have work to do.

T. Carlyle




LXXXVII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--About this time probably you will be reading a
Letter I hurried off for you by Dr. Russell in the last steamer;
and your friendly anxieties will partly be set at rest.  Had I
kept silence so very long?  I knew it was a long while;  but my
vague remorse had kept no date!  It behoves me now to write again
without delay;  to certify with all distinctness that I have
safely received your Letter of the 30th October, safely the Bill
for L25 it contained;--that you are a brave, friendly man, of
most serene, beneficient way of life;  and that I--God help me!--

By all means appoint this Mr. Clark to the honorary office of
Account-keeper--if he will accept it!  By Parker's list of
questions from him, and by earlier reminiscences recalled on that
occasion, I can discern that he is a man of lynx eyesight, of an
all-investigating curiosity:  if he will accept this sublime
appointment, it will be the clearest case of elective affinity.
Accounts to you must be horrible;  as they are to me:  indeed, I
seldom read beyond the _last_ line of them, if I can find the
last;  and one of the insupportabilities of Bookseller Accounts
is that nobody but a wizard, or regular adept in such matters,
can tell where the last line, and final net result of the whole
accursed babblement, is to be found!  By all means solicit
Clark;--at all events, do you give it up, I pray you, and let the
Booksellers do their own wise way.  It really is not material;
let the poor fellows have length of halter.  Every new Bill from
America comes to me like a kind of heavenly miracle;  a reaping
where I never sowed, and did not expect to reap:  the quantity of
it is a thing I can never bring in question.--For your English
account with Nickerson I can yet say nothing more;  perhaps about
Newyear's-day the poor man will enable me to say something.  I
hear however that the Pirate has sold off, or nearly so, his
Two-shillings edition of the _Essays,_ and is preparing to print
another;  this, directly in the teeth of Cash and double-entry
book-keeping, I take to be good news.

James is a very good fellow, better and better as we see him
more.  Something shy and skittish in the man;  but a brave
heart intrinsically, with sound, earnest sense, with plenty
of insight and even humor.  He confirms an observation of mine,
which indeed I find is hundreds of years old, that a stammering
man is never a worthless one.  Physiology can tell you why.  It
is an excess of delicacy, excess of sensibility to the presence
of his fellow-creature, that makes him stammer.  Hammond l'Estrange
says, "Who ever heard of a stammering man that was a fool?"  Really
there is something in that.--James is now off to the Isle of Wight;
will see Sterling at Ventnor there;  see whether such an Isle or
France will suit better for a winter residence.

W.E. Channing's _Poems_ are also a kind gift from you.  I have
read the pieces _you had cut up for me:_  worthy indeed of
reading!  That Poem _on Death_ is the utterance of a valiant,
noble heart, which in rhyme or prose I shall expect more news of
by and by.  But at bottom "Poetry" is a most suspicious affair
for me at present!  You cannot fancy the oceans of Twaddle that
human Creatures emit upon me, in these times;  as if, when the
lines had a jingle in them, a Nothing could be Something, and the
point were gained!  It is becoming a horror to me,--as all speech
without meaning more and more is.  I said to Richard Milnes, "Now
in honesty what is the use of putting your accusative _before_
the verb, and otherwise entangling the syntax;  if there really
is an image of any object, thought, or thing within you, for
God's sake let me have it the _shortest_ way, and I will so
cheerfully excuse the _omission_ of the jingle at the end:
cannot I do without that!"--Milnes answered, "Ah, my dear fellow,
it is because we have no thought, or almost none;  a little
thought goes a great way when you put it into rhyme!"  Let a man
try to the very uttermost to _speak_ what he means, before
_singing_ is had recourse to.  Singing, in our curt English
speech, contrived expressly and almost exclusively for "despatch
of business," is terribly difficult.  Alfred Tennyson, alone of
our time, has proved it to be possible in some measure.  If
Channing will persist in melting such obdurate speech into music
he shall have my true wishes,--my augury that it will take an
enormous _heat_ from him!--Another Channing, whom I once saw
here, sends me a Progress-of-the-Species Periodical from New
York.  _Ach Gott!_  These people and their affairs seem all
"melting" rapidly enough, into thaw-slush or one knows not what.
Considerable madness is visible in them.  _Stare super antiquas
vias:_  "No," they say, "we cannot stand, or walk, or do any good
whatever there;  by God's blessing, we will fly,--will not you!--
here goes!"  And their _flight,_ it is as the flight of the
unwinged,--of oxen endeavoring to fly with the "wings" of an ox!
By such flying, universally practised, the "ancient ways" are
really like to become very deep before long.  In short, I am
terribly sick of all that;--and wish it would stay at home at
Fruitland, or where there is good pasture for it.  Friend
Emerson, alone of all voices, out of America, has sphere-music in
him for me,--alone of them all hitherto;  and is a prophecy and
sure dayspring in the East;  immeasurably cheering to me.  God
long prosper him;  keep him duly apart from that bottomless
hubbub which is not, at all cheering!  And so ends my Litany for
this day.

The Cromwell business, though I punch daily at it with all manner
of levers, remains immovable as Ailsa Crag.  Heaven alone knows
what I shall do with it.  I see and say to myself, It is
heroical;  Troy Town was probably not a more heroic business;
and this belongs to thee, to thy own people,--must it be dead
forever?--Perhaps yes,--and kill me too into the bargain.  Really
I think it very shocking that we run to Greece, to Italy, to &c.,
&c., and leave all at home lying buried as a nonentity.  Were I
absolute Sovereign and Chief Pontiff here, there should be a
study of the Old _English_ ages first of all.  I will pit Odin
against any Jupiter of them;  find Sea-kings that would have
given Jason a Roland for his Oliver!  We are, as you sometimes
say, a book-ridden people,--a phantom-ridden people.--All this
small household is well;  salutes you and yours with love old and
new.  Accept this hasty messenger;  accept my friendliest
farewell, dear Emerson.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




LXXXVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I have had two good letters from you, and it is
fully my turn to write, so you shall have a token on this latest
day of the year.  I rejoice in this good will you bear to so many
friends of mine,--if they will go to you, you must thank
yourself.  Best when you are mutually contented.  I wished lately
I might serve Mr. Macready, who sent me your letter.--I called on
him and introduced him to Sam G. Ward, my friend and the best man
in the city, and, besides all his personal merits, a master of
all the offices of hospitality.  Ward was to keep himself
informed of Macready's times, and bring me to him when there was
opportunity.  But he stayed but a few days in Boston, and, Ward
said, was in very good hands, and promised to see us when he
returns by and by.  I saw him in Hamlet, but should much prefer
to see him as Macready.

I must try to entice Mr. Macready out here into my pines and
alder bushes.  Just now the moon is shining on snow-drifts, four,
five, and six feet high, but, before his return, they will melt;
and already this my not native but ancestral village, which I
came to live in nearly ten years ago because it was the quietest
of farming towns, and off the road, is found to lie on the
directest line of road from Boston to Montreal, a railroad is
a-building through our secretest woodlands, and, tomorrow morning,
our people go to Boston in two hours instead of three, and, next
June, in one.  This petty revolution in our country matters was
very odious to me when it began, but it is hard to resist the joy
of all one's neighbors, and I must be contented to be carted like
a chattel in the cars and be glad to see the forest fall.  This
rushing on your journey is plainly a capital invention for our
spacious America, but it is more dignified and man-like to walk
barefoot.--But do you not see that we are getting to be
neighbors? a day from London to Liverpool;  twelve or eleven to
Boston;  and an hour to Concord;  and you have owed me a visit
these ten years.

I mean to send with your January _Dial_ a copy of the number for
Sterling, as it contains a review of his tragedy and poems, by
Margaret Fuller.  I have not yet seen the article, and the lady
affirms that it is very bad, as she was ill all the time she was
writing;  but I hope and believe better.  She, Margaret Fuller,
is an admirable person, whose writing gives feeble account of
her.  But I was to say that I shall send this _Dial_ for J.S. to
your care, as I know not the way to the Isle of Wight.

Enclosed in this letter I send a bill of exchange for L32 8s. 2d.
payable by Baring & Co.  It happens to represent an exact balance
on Munroe's books, and that slow mortal should have paid it
before.  I have not yet got to Clark, I who am a slow mortal, but
have my eye fixed on him.  Remember me and mine with kindest
salutations to your wife and brother.

Ever yours,
R.W. Emerson




LXXXIX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson, Some ten days ago came your Letter with a new Draft
of L32 and odd money in it:  all safe;  the Draft now gone into
the City to ripen into gold and silver, the Letter to be
acknowledged by some hasty response now and here.  America, I say
to myself looking at these money drafts, is a strange place;  the
highest comes out of it and the lowest!  Sydney Smith is singing
dolefully about doleful American repudiation, "_dis_owning of the
soft impeachment";  and here on the other hand is an American
man, in virtue of whom America has become definable withal as a
place from which fall heavenly manna-showers upon certain men, at
certain seasons of history, when perhaps manna-showers were not
the unneedfulest things!--We will take the good and the evil,
here as elsewhere, and heartily bless Heaven.

But now for the Draft at the top of this leaf.  One Colman, a
kind of Agricultural Missionary, much in vogue here at present,
has given it me;  it is Emerson's, the net produce hitherto (all
but two cents) of _Emerson's Essays._  I enclose farther the
Bookseller's hieroglyph papers;  unintelligible as all such are;
but sent over to you for scrutiny by the expert.  I gather only
that there are some Five Hundred and odd of the dear-priced
edition sold, some Two Hundred and odd still to sell, which the
Bookseller says are (in spite of pirates) slowly selling;  and
that the half profit upon the whole adventure up to this date has
been L24 15s. 11d. sterling,--equal, as I am taught, at $4.88 per
pound sterling, to $121.02, for which, all but the cents, here is
a draft on Boston, payable at sight.  Pray have yourself
straightway _paid;_  that if there be any mistake or delay I may
rectify it while time yet is.--I add, for the intelligence of the
Bookseller-Papers, that Fraser, with whom the bargain originally
stood, was succeeded by Nickerson;  these are the names of the
parties.  And so, dear Friend;  accept this munificent sum of
Money;  and expect a blessing with it if good wishes from the
heart of man can give one.  So much for that.

Did you receive a Dumfries Newspaper with a criticism in it?  The
author is one Gilfillan, a young Dissenting Minister in Dundee;
a person of great talent, ingenuousness, enthusiasm, and other
virtues;  whose position as a Preacher of bare old Calvinism
under penalty of death sometimes makes me tremble for him.  He
has written in that same Newspaper about all the notablest men of
his time;  Godwin, Corn-law Elliott and I know not all whom:  if
he publish the Book, I will take care to send it you. I saw the
man for the first time last autumn, at Dumfries;  as I said, his
being a Calvinist Dissenting Minister, economically fixed, and
spiritually with such germinations in him, forces me to be very
reserved to him.

John Sterling's _Dial_ shall be forwarded to Ventnor in the Isle
of Wight, whenever it arrives.  He was here, as probably I told
you, about two months ago, the old unresting brilliantly
radiating man.  He is now much richer in money than he was, and
poorer by the loss of a good Mother and good Wife:  I understand
he is building himself a brave house, and also busy writing a
poem.  He flings too much "sheet-lightning" and unrest into me
when we meet in these low moods of mine;  and yet one always
longs for him back again:  "No doing with him or without him,"
the dog!

My thrice unfortunate Book on Cromwell,--it is a real descent to
Hades, to Golgotha and Chaos!  I feel oftenest as if it were
possibler to die one's self than to bring it into life.  Besides,
my health is in general altogether despicable, my "spirits" equal
to those of the ninth part of a dyspeptic tailor!  One needs to
be able to go on in all kinds of spirits, in climate sunny or
sunless, or it will never do.  The planet Earth, says Voss,--take
four hexameters from Voss:

Journeys this Earth, her eye on a Sun, through the heavenly spaces;
Joyous in radiance, or joyless by fits and swallowed in tempests;
Falters not, alters not, equal advancing, home at the due hour:
So thou, weather-proof, constant, may, equal with day, March!

I have not a moment more tonight;--and besides am inclined to
write unprofitables if I persist.  Adieu, my friend;  all
blessings be with you always.

Yours ever truly,
T. Carlyle




XC. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I received by the last steamer your letter, and
its prefixed order for one hundred and twenty-one dollars, which
order I sent to Ward, who turned it at once into money.  Thanks,
dear friend, for your care and activity, which have brought me
this pleasing and most unlooked for result.  And I beg you, if
you know any family representative of Mr. Fraser, to express my
sense of obligation to that departed man.  I feel a kindness not
without some wonder for those good-natured five hundred
Englishmen who could buy and read my miscellany.  I shall not
fail to send them a new collection, which I hope they will like
better.  My faith in the Writers, as an organic class, increases
daily, and in the possibility to a faithful man of arriving at
statements for which he shall not feel responsible, but which
shall be parallel with nature.  Yet without any effort I fancy I
make progress also in the doctrine of Indifferency, and am
certain and content that the truth can very well spare me, and
have itself spoken by another without leaving it or me the worse.
Enough if we have learned that music exists, that it is proper to
us, and that we cannot go forth of it.  Our pipes, however shrill
and squeaking, certify this our faith in Tune, and the eternal
Amelioration may one day reach our ears and instruments.  It is a
poor second thought, this literary activity.

Perhaps I am not made obnoxious to much suffering, but I have had
happy hours enough in gazing from afar at the splendors of the
Intellectual Law, to overpay me for any pains I know.  Existence
may go on to be better, and, if it have such insights, it never
can be bad.  You sometimes charge me with I know not what sky-
blue, sky-void idealism.  As far as it is a partiality, I fear I
may be more deeply infected than you think me.  I have very
joyful dreams which I cannot bring to paper, much less to any
approach to practice, and I blame myself not at all for my
reveries, but that they have not yet got possession of my house
and barn.  But I shall not lose my love for books.  I only
worship Eternal Buddh in the retirements and intermissions of
Brahma.--But I must not egotize and generalize to the end of my
sheet, as I have a message or two to declare.

I enclose a bill of exchange on the Barings for thirty-six
pounds;  which is the sum of two recent payments of Munroe and of
Little and Brown, whereof I do not despair you shall yet have
some account in booksellers' figures.  I have got so far with
Clark as to have his consent to audit the accounts when I shall
get energy and time enough to compile them out of my ridiculous
Journal.  Munroe begs me to say what possibly I have already
asked for him, that, when the _History of Cromwell_ is ready to
be seen of men, you will have an entire copy of the Manuscript
taken, and sent over to us.  Then will he print a cheap edition
such as no one will undersell, and secure such a share of profit
to the author as the cheap press allows.  Perhaps only thirty or
forty pounds would make it worth while to take the trouble.  A
valued friend of mine wishes to know who wrote (perhaps three
years ago) a series of metaphysical articles in _Blackwood_ on
Consciousness.  Can you remember and tell me?  And now I commend
you to the good God, you and your History, and the true kind wife
who is always good to the eager Yankees, and am yours heartily,

R.W. Emerson



XCI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Till within five minutes of the limit of my time,
I had forgotten that this was the 3d of the Month;  that I
had a Letter to write acknowledging even money!  Take the
acknowledgment, given in all haste, not without a gratitude that
will last longer:  the Thirty-six pounds and odd shillings came
safe in your Letter, a new unlooked-for Gift.  America, I think,
is like an amiable family teapot;  you think it is all out long
since, and lo, the valuable implement yields you another cup, and
another!  Many thanks to you, who are the heart of America to me.

Republishing for one's friend's sake, I find on consulting my
Bookseller, is out here;  we have Pirates waiting for every
American thing of mark, as you have for every British;  to the
tender mercies of these, on both sides, I fancy the business must
be committed.  They do good too;  as all does, even carrion:
they send you _faster_ abroad, if the world have any use for
you;--oftenest it only thinks it has.  Your _Essays,_ the Pirated
_Essays,_ make an ugly yellow tatter of a Pamphlet, price 1s.
6d.;  but the edition is all sold, I understand:  and even
Nickerson has not entirely ceased to sell.  The same Pirate who
pounced upon you made an attempt the other day on my poor _Life
of Schiller,_ but I put the due spoke in his wheel.  They have
sent me Lowell's _Poems;_  they are bringing out Jean Paul's
Life, &c., &c.;  the hungry _Canaille._  It is strange that men
should feel themselves so entirely at liberty to steal, simply
because there is no gallows to hang them for doing it.  Your new
Book will be eagerly waited for by that class of persons;  and
also by another class which is daily increasing here.

The only other thing I am "not to forget" is that of the _Essay
on Consciousness_ in _Blackwood._  The writer of those Papers is
one Ferrier, a Nephew of the Edinburgh Miss Ferrier who wrote
_Marriage_ and some other Novels;  Nephew also of Professor
Wilson (Christopher North), and married to one of his daughters.
A man of perhaps five-and-thirty;  I remember him in boyhood,
while he was boarded with an Annandale Clergyman;  I have seen
him since manhood, and liked him well:  a solid, square-visaged,
dark kind of man, more like your Theodore Parker than any mutual
specimen I can recollect.

He got the usual education of an Edinburgh Advocate;  but found
no practice at the Bar, nor sought any with due anxiety, I
believe;  addicted himself to logical meditations;--became,
the other year, Professor of Universal History, or some
such thing, in the Edinburgh University, and lectures with
hardly any audience:  a certain _young_ public wanted me
to be that Professor there, but I knew better,--Is this
enough about Ferrier?

I will not add another word;  the time being _past,_
irretrievable except by half-running!

Write us your Book;  and be well and happy always!




XCII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--There had been a long time without direct news
from you, till four days ago your Letter arrived.  This day I
understand to be the ultimate limit of the American Mail;
yesterday, had it not been Sunday, would have been the limit:  I
write a line, therefore, though in very great haste.

Poor Sterling, even I now begin to fear, is in a very bad way.
He had two successive attacks of spitting of blood, some three
months ago or more;  the second attack of such violence, and his
previous condition then so weak, that the Doctor as good as gave
up hope,--the poor Patient himself had from the first given it
up.  Our poor Friend has had so many attacks of that nature, and
so rapidly always rallied from them, I gave no ear to these
sinister prognostics;  but now that I see the summer influences
passing over him without visible improvement, and our good
weather looking towards a close without so much strength added as
will authorize even a new voyage to Madeira;--I too am at last
joining in the general discouragement;  all the sadder to me that
I shut it out so long.  Sir James Clark, our best-accredited
Physician for such diseases, declares that Life, for certain
months, may linger, with great pain;  but that recovery is not to
be expected.  Great part of the lungs, it appears, is totally
unserviceable for respiration;  from the remainder, especially in
times of coughing, it is with the greatest difficulty that breath
enough is obtained.  Our poor Patient passes the night in a
sitting posture;  cannot lie down:  that fact sticks with me ever
since I heard it!  He is very weak, very pale;  still "writes a
great deal daily";  but does not wish to see anybody;  declines
to "see even Carlyle," who offered to go to him.  His only
Brother, Anthony Sterling, a hardy soldier, lately withdrawn from
the Army, and settled in this quarter, whom we often communicate
with, is about going down to the Isle of Wight this week:  he saw
John four days ago, and brings nothing but bad news,--of which
indeed this removal of his to the neighborhood of the scene is a
practical testimony.  The old Father, a Widower for the last two
years, and very lonely and dispirited, seems getting feebler and
feebler:  he was here yesterday:  a pathetic kind of spectacle to
us.  Alas, alas!  But what can be said?  I say Nothing;  I have
written only one Note to Sterling:  I feel it probable that I
shall never see him more,--nor his like again in this world.  His
disease, as I have from of old construed it, is a burning of him
up by his own fire.  The restless vehemence of the man,
struggling in all ways these many years to find a legitimate
outlet, and finding, except for transitory, unsatisfactory
coruscations, none, has undermined its Clay Prison in the weakest
point (which proves to be the lungs), and will make outlet
_there._  My poor Sterling!  It is an old tragedy;  and very
stern whenever it repeats itself of new.

Today I get answer about Alfred Tennyson:  all is right on that
side.  Moxon informs me that the Russell Books and Letter arrived
duly, and were duly forwarded and safely received;  nay, farther,
that Tennyson is now in Town, and means to come and see me.  Of
this latter result I shall be very glad:  Alfred is one of the
few British or Foreign Figures (a not increasing number I think!)
who are and remain beautiful to me;--a true human soul, or some
authentic approximation thereto, to whom your own soul can say,
Brother!--However, I doubt he will not come;  he often skips me,
in these brief visits to Town;  skips everybody indeed;  being a
man solitary and sad, as certain men are, dwelling in an element
of gloom,--carrying a bit of Chaos about him, in short, which he
is manufacturing into Cosmos!

Alfred is the son of a Lincolnshire Gentleman Farmer, I think;
indeed, you see in his verses that he is a native of "moated
granges," and green, fat pastures, not of mountains and their
torrents and storms.  He had his breeding at Cambridge, as if for
the Law or Church;  being master of a small annuity on his
Father's decease, he preferred clubbing with his Mother and some
Sisters, to live unpromoted and write Poems.  In this way he
lives still, now here, now there;  the family always within reach
of London, never in it;  he himself making rare and brief visits,
lodging in some old comrade's rooms.  I think he must be under
forty, not much under it.  One of the finest-looking men in the
world.  A great shock of rough dusty-dark hair;  bright-laughing
hazel eyes;  massive aquiline face, most massive yet most
delicate;  of sallow-brown complexion, almost Indian-looking;
clothes cynically loose, free-and-easy;--smokes infinite tobacco.
His voice is musical metallic,--fit for loud laughter and
piercing wail, and all that may lie between;  speech, and
speculation free and plenteous:  I do not meet, in these late
decades, such company over a pipe!--We shall see what he will
grow to.  He is often unwell;  very chaotic,--his way is through
Chaos and the Bottomless and Pathless;  not handy for making out
many miles upon. (O Paper!)

I trust there is now joy in place of pain in the House at
Concord, and a certain Mother grateful again to the Supreme
Powers!  We are all in our customary health here, or nearly so;
my Wife has been in Lancashire, among her kindred there, for a
month lately:  our swollen City is getting empty and still;  we
think of trying an Autumn _here_ this time.--Get your Book ready;
there are readers ready for it!  And be busy and victorious!

Ever Yours,
T. Carlyle

My _History_ is frightful!  If I live, it is like to be
completed;  but whether I shall live, and not rather be buried
alive, broken-hearted, in the Serbonian Quagmires of English
Stupidity, and so sleep beside Cromwell, often seems uncertain.
Erebus has no uglier, brutaler element.  Let us say nothing of
it.  Let us do it, or leave it to the Devils.  _Ay de mi!_




XCIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I have just learned that in an hour Mr.
Wilmer's mail-bag for London, by the "Acadia," closes, and I will
not lose the occasion of sending you a hasty line:  though I had
designed to write you from home on sundry matters, which now must
wait.  I send by this steamer some sheets, to the bookseller John
Chapman,--proofsheets of my new book of Essays.  Chapman wrote to
me by the last steamer, urging me to send him some manuscript
that had not yet been published in America, and he thought he
could make an advantage from printing it, and even, in some
conditions, procure a copyright, and he would publish for me on
the plan of half-profits.  The request was so timely, since I was
not only printing a book, but also a pamphlet (an Address to
citizens of some thirteen towns who celebrated in Concord the
negro Emancipation on 1st August last), that I came to town
yesterday, and hastened the printers, and have now sent him
proofs of all the Address, and of more than half the book.  If
you can give Chapman any counsel, or save me from any nonsense by
enjoining on him careful correction, you shall.

I looked eagerly for a letter from you by the last steamer, to
give me exact tidings of Sterling.  None came;  but I received a
short note from Sterling himself, which intimated that he had but
a few more days to live.  It is gloomy news.  I beg you will
write me everything you can relate of him, by the next mail.  If
you can learn from his friends whether the packet of his
Manuscripts and printed papers, returned by Russell and sent by
me through Harnden's Express to Ventnor, arrived safely, it would
be a satisfaction.

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




XCIV. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--There should a Letter have come for you by that
Steamer;  for I wrote one duly, and posted it in good time
myself:  I will hope therefore it was but some delay of some
subaltern official, such as I am told occasionally chances, and
that you got the Letter after all in a day or two.  It would give
you notice, more or less, up to its date, of all the points you
had inquired about there is now little to be added;  except
concerning the main point, That the catastrophe has arrived there
as we foresaw, and all is ended.

John Sterling died at his house in Ventnor on the night of
Wednesday, 18th September, about eleven o'clock;  unexpectedly at
last, and to appearance without pain.  His Sister-in-law, Mrs.
Maurice;  had gone down to him from this place about a week
before;  other friends were waiting as it were in view of him;
but he wished generally to be alone, to continue to the last
setting his house and his heart more and more in order for the
Great Journey.  For about a fortnight back he had ceased to have
himself formally dressed;  had sat only in his dressing-gown, but
I believe was still daily wheeled into his Library, and sat very
calmly sorting and working there.  He sent me two Notes, and
various messages, and gifts of little keepsakes to my Wife and
myself:  the Notes were brief, stern and loving;  altogether
noble;  never to be forgotten in this world.  His Brother
Anthony, who had been in the Isle of Wight within call for
several weeks, had now come up to Town again;  but, after about a
week, decided that he would run down again, and look.  He arrived
on the Wednesday night, about nine o'clock;  found no visible
change;  the brave Patient calm as ever, ready to speak as ever,
--to say, in direct words which he would often do, or indirectly
as his whole speech and conduct did, "God is Great."  Anthony and
he talked for a while, then took leave for the night;  in
few minutes more, Anthony was summoned to the bedside, and
at eleven o'clock, as I said, the curtain dropt, and it was
all ended.--_Euge!_

Whether the American _Manuscripts_ had arrived I do not yet know,
but probably shall before this Letter goes;  for Anthony is to
return hither on Tuesday, and I will inquire.  Our Friend is
buried in Ventnor Churchyard;  four big Elms overshadow the
little spot;  it is situated on the southeast side of that green
Island, on the slope of steep hills (as I understand it) that
look toward the Sun, and are close within sight and hearing of
the Sea.  There shall he rest, and have fit lullaby, this brave
one.  He has died as a man should;  like an old Roman, yet with
the Christian Bibles and all newest revelations present to him.
He refused to see friends;  men whom I think he loved as well as
any,--me for one when I obliquely proposed it, he refused.  He
was even a little stern on his nearest relatives when they came
to him:  Do I need your help to die?  Phocion-like he seemed to
feel degraded by physical decay;  to feel that he ought to wrap
his mantle round him, and say, "I come, Persephoneia;  it is not
I that linger!"--His Sister-in-law, Anthony's Wife, probably
about a month ago, while they were still in Wight, had begged
that she might see him yet once;  her husband would be there too,
she engaged not to speak.  Anthony had not yet persuaded him,
when she, finding the door half open, went in:  his pale changed
countenance almost made her shriek;  she stept forward silently,
kissed his brow in silence;  he burst into tears.  Let us speak
no more of this.--A great quantity of papers, I understand, are
left for my determination;  what is to be done with them I will
sacredly endeavor to do.

I have visited your Bookseller Chapman;  seen the Proof-sheets
lying on his table;  taken order that the reprint shall be well
corrected,--indeed, I am to read every sheet myself, and in that
way get acquainted with it, before it go into stereotype.
Chapman is a tall, lank youth of five-and-twenty;  full of good
will, but of what other equipment time must yet try.  By a little
Book of his, which I looked at some months ago, he seemed to me
sunk very deep in the dust-hole of extinct Socinianism;  a
painful predicament for a man!  He is not sure of saving much
copyright for you;  but he will do honestly what in that respect
is doable;  and he will print the Book correctly, and publish it
decently, I saying _imprimatur_ if occasion be,--and your ever-
increasing little congregation here will do with the new word
what they can.  I add no more today;  reserving a little nook for
the answer I hope to get two days hence.  Adieu, my Friend:  it
is silent Sunday;  the populace not yet admitted to their beer-
shops, till the respectabilities conclude their rubric-
mummeries,--a much more audacious feat than beer!  We have
wet wind at Northeast, and a sky somewhat of the dreariest:--
Courage! a _little_ way above it reigns mere blue, and
sunshine eternally!--T.C.

_Wednesday, October 2d._--The Letter had to wait till today, and
is still in time.  Anthony Sterling, who is yet at Ventnor,
apprises me this morning that according to his and the Governess's
belief the Russell Manuscripts arrived duly, and were spoken
of more than once by our Friend.--On Monday I received from
this same Anthony a big packet by Post;  it contains among
other things all your Letters to John, wrapt up carefully, and
addressed in his hand, "Emerson's Letters, to be returned through
the hands of Carlyle":  they shall go towards you next week, by
Mr. James, who is about returning.  Among the other Papers was
one containing seven stanzas of verse addressed to T. Carlyle,
14th September;  full of love and enthusiasm;--the Friday before
his death:  I was visiting the old City of Winchester that day,
among the tombs of Canutes and eldest noble ones:  you may judge
how sacred the memory of those hours now is!

I have read your Slavery Address;  this morning the first _half_-
sheet, in Proof, of the _Essays_ has come:  perfectly correct,
and right good reading.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




XCV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I enclose a bill of exchange for thirty pounds
sterling which I procured in town today at $5 each pound, or
$150;  so high, it seems, is the rate at present, higher, they
said, than for years.  It is good booksellers' money from Little
and Brown, and James Munroe & Co., in unequal proportions.  If
you wish for more accurate information and have a great deal of
patience, there is still hope that you may obtain it before
death;  for I this day met E.P. Clark in Washington Street, and
he reported some progress in auditing of accounts, and said that
when presently his family should return to town for the winter,
he would see to the end of them, i.e. the accounts.

I received with great satisfaction your letter of July, which
came by a later steamer than it was written for, but gave me
exact and solid information on what I most wished to know.  May
you live forever, and may your reports of men and things be
accessible to me whilst I live!  Even if, as now in Sterling's
case, the news are the worst, or nearly so, yet let whatever
comes for knowledge be precise, for the direst tragedy that is
accurately true must share the blessing of the Universe.  I have
no later tidings from Sterling, and I must still look to you to
tell me what you can.  I dread that the story should be short.
May you have much good to tell of him, and for many a day to
come!  The sketch you drew of Tennyson was right welcome, for he
is an old favorite of mine,--I owned his book before I saw your
face;--though I love him with allowance.  O cherish him with love
and praise, and draw from him whole books full of new verses yet.
The only point on which you never give precise intelligence is
your own book;  but you shall have your will in that;  so only
you arrive on the shores of light at last, with your mystic
freight fished partly out of the seas of time, and partly out of
the empyrean deeps.

I have much regretted a sudden note I wrote you just before the
steamer of 1 September sailed, entreating you to cumber yourself
about my proofsheets sent to the London bookseller.  I heartily
absolve you from all such vexations.  Nothing could be more
inconsiderate.  Mr. Chapman is undoubtedly amply competent to
ordinary correction, and I much prefer to send you my little book
in decent trim than in rags and stains and deformities more than
its own.  I have just corrected and sent to the steamer the last
sheets for Mr. Chapman, who is to find English readers if he can.
I shall ask Mr. Chapman to send you a copy, for his edition will
be more correct than mine.  What can I tell you better?  Why even
this, that this house rejoices in a brave boy, now near three
months old.  Edward we call him, and my wife calls him Edward
Waldo.  When shall I show him to you?  And when shall I show you
a pretty pasture and wood-lot which I bought last week on the
borders of a lake which is the chief ornament of this town,
called Walden Pond?  One of these days, if I should have any
money, I may build me a cabin or a turret there high as the tree-
tops, and spend my nights as well as days in the midst of a
beauty which never fades for me.

Yours with love,
R.W. Emerson




XCVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--By the clearest law I am bound to write you a word
today, were my haste even greater than it is.  The last American
fleet or ship, about the middle of last month, brought me a Draft
for Thirty Pounds;  which I converted into ready cash, and have
here,--and am now your grateful debtor for, as of old.  There
seems to be no end to those Boston Booksellers!  I think the well
is dry;  and straightway it begins to run again.  Thanks to you:
--it is, I dare say, a thing you too are grateful for.  We will
recognize it among the good things of this rather indifferent
world.--By the way, if that good Clark _like_ his business, let
him go on with it;  but if not, stop him, poor fellow!  It is to
me a matter of really small moment whether those Booksellers'
accounts be ever audited in this world, or left over to the
General Day of Audit.  I myself shudder at the sight of such
things;  and make my bargain here so always as to have no trade
with them, but to be _netto_ from the first.  Why should I
plague poor Clark with them, if it be any plague to him?  The
Booksellers will never _know_ but we examine them!  The very
terror of Clark's name will be as the bark of chained Mastiff,--
and no need for actual biting!  Have due pity on the man.

Your English volume of _Essays,_ as Chapman probably informs you
by this Post, was advertised yesterday, "with a Preface from me."
That is hardly accurate, that latter clause.  My "Preface"
consists only of a certificate that the Book is correctly
printed, and sent forth by a Publisher of your appointment, whom
therefore all readers of yours ought to regard accordingly.
Nothing more.  There proves, I believe, no visible real vestige
of a copyright obtainable here;  only Chapman asserts that he
_has_ obtained one, and that he will take all contraveners into
Chancery,--which has a terrible sound;  and indeed the Act he
founds on is of so distracted, inextricable a character, it may
mean anything and all things, and no Sergeant Talfourd whom we
could consult durst take upon him to say that it meant almost
anything whatever.  The sound of "Chancery," the stereotype
character of this volume, and its cheap price, may perhaps deter
pirates,--who are but a weak body in this country as yet.  I
judged it right to help in that;  and impertinent, at this stage
of affairs, to go any farther.  The Book is very fairly printed,
onward. at least to the Essay _New England Politics,_ where my
"perfect-copy" of the sheets as yet stops.  I did not read any of
the Proofs except two;  finding it quite superfluous, and a sad
waste of time to the hurried Chapman himself.  I have found yet
but one error, and that a very correctable one, "narvest" for
"harvest";--no other that I recollect at present.

The work itself falling on me by driblets has not the right
chance yet--not till I get it in the bound state, and read it all
at once--to produce its due impression on me.  But I will say
already of it, It is a _sermon_ to me, as all your other
deliberate utterances are;  a real _word,_ which I feel to be
such,--alas, almost or altogether the one such, in a world all
full of jargons, hearsays, echoes, and vain noises, which cannot
pass with me for _words!_  This is a praise far beyond any
"literary" one;  literary praises are not worth repeating in
comparison.  For the rest, I have to object still (what you will
call objecting against the Law of Nature) that we find you a
Speaker indeed, but as it were a _Soliloquizer_ on the eternal
mountain-tops only, in vast solitudes where men and their affairs
lie all hushed in a very dim remoteness;  and only the man and
the stars and the earth are visible,--whom, so fine a fellow
seems he, we could perpetually punch into, and say, "Why won't
you come and help us then?  We have terrible need of one man like
you down among us!  It is cold and vacant up there;  nothing
paintable but rainbows and emotions;  come down, and you shall do
life-pictures, passions, facts,--which _transcend_ all thought,
and leave it stuttering and stammering!  To which he answers that
he won't, can't, and doesn't want to (as the Cockneys have it):
and so I leave him, and say, "You Western Gymnosophist!  Well, we
can afford one man for that too.  But--!--By the bye, I ought to
say, the sentences are very _brief;_  and did not, in my sheet
reading, always entirely cohere for me.  Pure genuine Saxon;
strong and simple;  of a clearness, of a beauty--But they did
not, sometimes, rightly stick to their foregoers and their
followers:  the paragraph not as a beaten ingot, but as a
beautiful square _bag of duck-shot_ held together by canvas!  I
will try them again, with the Book deliberately before me.--There
are also one or two utterances about "Jesus," "immortality," and
so forth, which will produce wide-eyes here and there.  I do not
say it was wrong to utter them;  a man obeys his own Daemon in
these cases as his supreme law.  I dare say you are a little
bored occasionally with "Jesus," &c.,--as I confess I myself am,
when I discern what a beggarly Twaddle they have made of all
that, what a greasy Cataplasm to lay to their own poltrooneries;-
-and an impatient person may exclaim with Voltaire, in serious
moments:  "_Au nom de Dieu, ne me parlez plus de cet homme-la!_
I have had enough of him;--I tell you I am alive too!"

Well, I have scribbled at a great rate;  regardless of Time's
flight!--My Wife thanks many times for M. Fuller's Book.  I sent
by Mr. James a small Packet of _your_ letters--which will make
you sad to look at them!  Adieu, dear friend.

T. Carlyle




XCVII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I have long owed you a letter and have much to
acknowledge.  Your two letters containing tidings, the first of
the mortal illness, and the second of the death of Sterling, I
had no heart to answer.  I had nothing to say.  Alas! as in so
many instances heretofore, I knew not what to think.  Life is
somewhat customary and usual;  and death is the unusual and
astonishing;  it kills in so far the survivor also, when it
ravishes from him friendship and the most noble and admirable
qualities.  That which we call faith seems somewhat stoical and
selfish, if we use it as a retreat from the pangs this ravishment
inflicts.  I had never seen him, but I held him fast;  now I see
him not, but I can no longer hold him.  Who can say what he yet
is and will be to me?  The most just and generous can best divine
that.  I have written in vain to James to visit me, or to send me
tidings.  He sent me, without any note, the parcel you confided
to him, and has gone to Albany, or I know not whither.

I have your notes of the progress of my London printing, and, at
last, the book itself.  It was thoughtless in me to ask your
attention to the book at all in the proof state;  the printer
might have been fully trusted with corrected printed pages before
him.  Nor should Chapman have taxed you for an advertisement;
only, I doubt not he was glad of a chance to have business with
you;  and, of course, was too thankful for any Preface.  Thanks
to you for the kind thought of a "Notice," and for its friendly
wit.  You shall not do this thing again, if I should send you any
more books.  A Preface from you is a sort of banner or oriflamme,
a little too splendid for my occasion, and misleads.  I fancy my
readers to be a very quiet, plain, even obscure class,--men and
women of some religious culture and aspirations, young, or else
mystical, and by no means including the great literary and
fashionable army, which no man can count, who now read your
books.  If you introduce me, your readers and the literary papers
try to read me, and with false expectations.  I had rather have
fewer readers and only such as belong to me.

I doubt not your stricture on the book as sometimes unconnected
and inconsecutive is just.  Your words are very gentle.  I should
describe it much more harshly.  My knowledge of the defects of
these things I write is all but sufficient to hinder me from
writing at all.  I am only a sort of lieutenant here in the
deplorable absence of captains, and write the laws ill as
thinking it a better homage than universal silence.  You
Londoners know little of the dignities and duties of country
lyceums.  But of what you say now and heretofore respecting the
remoteness of my writing and thinking from real life, though I
hear substantially the same criticism made by my countrymen, I do
not know what it means.  If I can at any time express the law and
the ideal right, that should satisfy me without measuring the
divergence from it of the last act of Congress.  And though I
sometimes accept a popular call, and preach on Temperance or the
Abolition of Slavery, as lately on the 1st of August, I am sure
to feel, before I have done with it, what an intrusion it is into
another sphere, and so much loss of virtue in my own.  Since I am
not to see you from year to year, is there never an Englishman
who knows you well, who comes to America, and whom you can send
to me to answer all my questions?  Health and love and joy to you
and yours.

R.W. Emerson




XCVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Carey and Hart of Philadelphia, booksellers,
have lately proposed to buy the remainder of our Boston edition
of your _Miscellanies,_ or to give you a bonus for sanctioning an
edition of the same, which they propose to publish.  On inquiry,
I have found that only thirteen entire sets of four volumes
remain to us unsold;  whilst we have 226 copies of Volume III.,
and 243 copies of Volume IV., remaining.

In replying to Mr. Carey, I proposed that, besides the proposed
bonus, he should buy of me these old volumes, which are not bound
but folded, at 25 cents a volume, (Monroe having roughly computed
the cost at 40 cents a volume,) but this he declines to do, and
offers fifty pounds sterling for his bonus.  I decided at once to
accept his offer, thinking it a more favorable winding up of our
account than I could otherwise look for;  as Mr. Carey knows much
better how to defend himself from pirates than I do.  So I am to
publish that his edition is edited with your concurrence.  Our
own remaining copies of entire sets I shall sell at once to
Monroe, at a reduced price, and the odd volumes I think to
dispose of by giving them a new and independent title-page.  In
the circumstances of the trade here, I think Mr. Carey's offer a
very liberal one, and he is reputed in his dealings eminently
just and generous.

My friend William Furness, who has corresponded with me on
Carey's behalf, has added now another letter to say that Mr.
Carey wishes to procure a picture of Mr. Carlyle to be engraved
for this edition.  "He understands there is a good head by
Laurence, and he wishes to employ some London artist to make a
copy of it in oil or water colors, or in any way that will
suffice for the engraver;  and he proposes to apply to Mr.
Carlyle for permission through Inman the American artist who is
now in England."  Furness goes on to ask for my "good word" with
you in furtherance of this design.  Well, I heartily hope you
will not resist so much good nature and true love;  for Mr.
Furness and Mr. Griswold, and others who compose a sort
of advising committee to Mr. Carey, are sincere lovers of
yours.  One more opportunity this crisis in our accounts will
give to that truest of all Carlylians, E.P. Clark, to make his
report.  I called at his house two nights ago, in Boston;  he
promised immediate attention, but quickly drew me aside to
his "Illustrations of Carlyle," an endless train of books, and
portfolios, and boxes of prints, in which every precious word of
that master is explained or confirmed.

Affectionately yours,
R.W. Emerson




XCIX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--By the last Packet, which sailed on the 3d of the
month, I forgot to write to   you, though already in your debt
one Letter;  and there now has another Letter arrived, which on
the footing of mere business demands to be answered.  I write
straightway;  not knowing how the Post-Office people will
contrive the conveyance, or whether it can be sooner than by the
next Steam ship, but willing to give them a chance.

You have made another brave bargain for me with the Philadelphia
people;  to all of which I can say nothing but _"Euge! Papae!"_
It seems to me strange, in the present state of Copyright, how my
sanction or the contrary can be worth L50 to any American
Bookseller;  but so it is, to all appearance;  let it be so,
therefore, with thanks and surprise.  The Messrs. Carey and Lea
distinguish themselves by the beauty of their Editions;  a poor
Author does not go abroad among his friends in dirty paper, full
of misprints, under their guidance;  this is as handsome an item
of the business as any.  As to the Portrait too, I will be as
"amiable" as heart could wish;  truly it will be worth my while
to take a little pains that the kind Philadelphia Editors do once
for all get a faithful Portrait of me, since they are about it,
and so prevent counterfeits from getting into circulation.  I
will endeavor to do in that matter whatsoever they require of me;
to the extent even of sitting two days for a Crayon Sketch such
as may be engraved,--though this new sacrifice of patience will
not be needed as matters are.  It stands thus:  there is no
Painter, of the numbers who have wasted my time and their own
with trying, that has indicated any capability of catching a true
Likeness, but one Samuel Lawrence;  a young Painter of real
talent, not quite so young now, but still only struggling for
complete mastership in the management of colors.  He does crayon
sketches in a way to please almost himself;  but his oil
paintings, at least till within a year or two, have indicated
only a great faculty still crude in that particular.  His oil
portrait of me, which you speak of, is almost terrible to behold!
It has the look of a Jotun, of a Scandinavian Demon, grim, sad,
as the angel of Death;--and the coloring is so _brick_ish, the
finishing so coarse, it reminds you withal of a flayed horse's
head!  _"Dinna speak o't."_  But the preparatory crayon-sketch of
this, still in existence, is admired by some judges;  poor John
Sterling bought it from the Painter, and it is now here in the
hands of his Brother, who will readily allow any authorized
person to take a drawing of it.  Lawrence himself, I imagine,
would be the fittest man to employ;  or your Mr. Ingham [Inman],
if he be here and a capable person:  one or both of these might
superintend the Engraving of it here, and not part with the plate
till it were pronounced satisfactory.  In short, I am willing to
do "anything in reason"!  Only if a Portrait is to be, I confess
I should rather avoid going abroad under the hands of bunglers,
at least of bunglers sanctioned by myself.  There is a Portrait
of me in some miserable farrago called _Spirit of the Age;_  a
farrago unknown to me, but a Portrait known, for poor Lawrence
brought it down to me with sorrow in his face;  it professes to
be from his painting;  is a "Lais _without_ the beauty" (as
Charles Lamb used to say);  a flayed horse's head without the
spiritualism, good or bad,--and simply figures on my mind as a
detestability;  which I had much rather never have seen.  These
poor _Spirit of the Age_ people applied to me;  I described
myself as "busy," &c.;  shoved them off me;  and this monster of
iniquity, resembling Nothing in the Earth or under it, is the
result.  In short, I am willing, I am willing;  and so let us not
waste another drop of ink on it at present!--On the whole, are
not you a strange fellow?  You apologize as if with real pain for
"trouble" I had, or indeed am falsely supposed to have had, with
Chapman here;  and forthwith engage again in correspondences, in
speculations, and negotiations, and I know not what, on my
behalf!  For shame, for shame!  Nay, you have done one very
ingenious thing;  to set Clark upon the Boston Booksellers'
accounts:  it is excellent;  Michael Scott setting the Devil
to twist ropes of sand, "There, my brave one;  see if you don't
find work there for a while!"  I never think of this Clark
without love and laughter.  Once more, _Euge!_  Chapman is fast
selling your Books here;  striking off a new Five Hundred from
his Stereotypes.  You are wrong as to your Public in this
Country;  it is a very pretty public;  extends pretty much,
I believe, through all ranks, and is a growing one,--and a truly
_aristocratic,_ being of the bravest inquiring minds we have.
All things are breaking up here, like Swedish Frost in the end of
March;  _gachis epouvantable._  Deep, very serious eternal
instincts, are at work;  but as yet no serious word at all that I
hear, except what reaches me from Concord at intervals.  Forward,
forward!  And you do not know what I mean by calling you
"unpractical," "theoretic."  _0 caeca corda!_  But I have no room
for such a theme at present.

The reason I tell you nothing about Cromwell is, alas, that there
is nothing to be told.  I am day and night, these long months and
years, very miserable about it,--nigh broken-hearted often.  Such
a scandalous accumulation of Human Stupidity in every form never
lay before on such a subject.  No history of it can be written to
this wretched, fleering, sneering, canting, twaddling, God-
forgetting generation.  How can you explain men to Apes by the
Dead Sea?  And I am very sickly too, and my Wife is ill all this
cold weather,--and I am sunk in the bowels of Chaos, and scarce
once in the three months or so see so much as a possibility of
ever getting out!  Cromwell's own _Letters and Speeches_ I have
gathered together, and washed clean from a thousand ordures:
these I do sometimes think of bringing out in a legible shape;--
perhaps soon.  Adieu, dear friend, with blessings always.

T. Carlyle

Poor Sydney Smith is understood to be dying;  water on the chest;
past hope of Doctors.  Alas!




C. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I grieve to think of my slackness in writing,
which suffers steamer after steamer to go without a letter.  But
I have still hoped, before each of the late packets sailed, that
I should have a message to send that would enforce a letter.  I
wrote you some time ago of Mr. Carey's liberal proposition in
relation to your _Miscellanies._  I wrote, of course, to Furness,
through whom it was made to me, accepting the proposition;  and I
forwarded to Mr. Carey a letter from me to be printed at the
beginning of the book, signifying your good-will to the edition,
and acknowledging the justice and liberality of the publishers.
I have heard no more from them, and now, a fortnight since, the
newspaper announces the death of Mr. Carey.  He died very
suddenly, though always an invalid and extremely crippled.  His
death is very much regretted in the Philadelphia papers, where he
bore the reputation of a most liberal patron of good and fine
arts.  I have not heard from Mr. Furness, and have thought I
should still expect a letter from him.  I hope our correspondence
will stand as a contract which Mr. Carey's representatives will
feel bound to execute.  They had sent me a little earlier a copy
of Mr. Sartain's engraving from their water-color copy of
Laurence's head of you.  They were eager to have the engraving
pronounced a good likeness.  I showed it to Sumner, and Russell,
and Theodore Parker, who have seen you long since I had, and they
shook their heads unanimously and declared that D'Orsay's profile
was much more like.

I creep along the roads and fields of this town as I have done
from year to year.  When my garden is shamefully overgrown with
weeds, I pull up some of them.  I prune my apples and pears.  I
have a few friends who gild many hours of the year.  I sometimes
write verses.  I tell you with some unwillingness, as knowing
your distaste for such things, that I have received so many
applications from readers and printers for a volume of poems that
I have seriously taken in hand the collection, transcription, or
scription of such a volume, and may do the enormity before New
Year's day.  Fear not, dear friend, you shall not have to read
one line.  Perhaps I shall send you an official copy, but I shall
appeal to the tenderness of Jane Carlyle, and excuse your
formidable self, for the benefit of us both.  Where all writing
is such a caricature of the subject, what signifies whether the
form is a little more or less ornate and luxurious?  Meantime, I
think to set a few heads before me, as good texts for winter
evening entertainments.  I wrote a deal about Napoleon a few
months ago, after reading a library of memoirs.  Now I have
Plato, Montaigne, and Swedenborg, and more in the clouds behind.
What news of Naseby and Worcester?




CI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Your Letter, which had been very long expected,
has been in my hand above a month now;  and still no answer sent
to it.  I thought of answering straightway;  but the day went
by, days went by;--and at length I decided to wait till my
insupportable Burden (the "Stupidity of Two Centuries" as I call
it, which is a heavy load for one man!) were rolled off my
shoulders, and I could resume the habit of writing Letters, which
has almost left me for many months.  By the unspeakable blessing
of Heaven that consummation has now arrived, about four days ago
I wrote my last word on _Cromwell's Letters and Speeches;_  and
one of the earliest uses I make of my recovered freedom is to
salute you again.  The Book is nearly printed:  two big volumes;
about a half of it, I think, my own;  the real utterances of the
man Oliver Cromwell once more legible to earnest men.  Legible
really to an unexpected extent:  for the Book took quite an
unexpected figure in my hands;  and is now a kind of Life of
Oliver, the best that circumstances would permit me to do:--
whether either I or England shall be, in my time, fit for a
better, remains submitted to the Destinies at present.  I have
tied up the whole Puritan Paper-Litter (considerable masses of it
still unburnt) with tight strings, and hidden it at the bottom of
my deepest repositories:  there shall _it,_ if Heaven please, lie
dormant for a time and times.  Such an element as I have been in,
no human tongue can give account of.  The disgust of my Soul has
been great;  a really _pious_ labor:  worth very little when I
have done it;  but the best I could do;  and that is quite
enough.  I feel the liveliest gratitude to the gods that I have
got out of it alive.  The Book is very dull, but it is actually
legible:  all the ingenious faculty I had, and ten times as much
would have been useful there, has been employed in elucidation;
in saying, and chiefly in forbearing to say,--in annihilating
continents of brutal wreck and dung:  _Ach Gott!_--But in fact
you will see it by and by; and then form your own conclusions
about it.  They are going to publish it in October, I find:  I
tried hard to get you a complete copy of the sheets by this
Steamer;  but it proves to be flatly impossible;--perhaps
luckily;  for I think you would have been bothering yourself with
some new Bookseller negotiation about it;  and that, as copyright
and other matters now stand, is a thing I cannot recommend.
--Enough of it now:  only let all my silences and other
shortcomings be explained thereby.  I am now off for the North
Country, for a snatch still at the small remnants of Summer, and
a little free air and sunshine.  I am really far from well,
though I have been riding diligently for three months back, and
doing what I could to help myself.

Very glad shall I be, my Friend, to have some new utterances from
you either in verse or in prose!  What you say about the vast
_imperfection_ of all modes of utterance is most true indeed.
Let a man speak and sing, and do, and sputter and gesticulate as
he may,--the meaning of him is most ineffectually shown forth,
poor fellow;  rather _indicated_ as if by straggling symbols,
than _spoken_ or visually expressed!  Poor fellow!  So the great
rule is, That he _have_ a good manful meaning, and then that he
take what "mode of utterance" is honestly the readiest for him.--
I wish you would take an American Hero, one whom you really love;
and give us a History of him,--make an artistic bronze statue (in
good _words_) of his Life and him!  I do indeed.--But speak of
what you will, you are welcome to me.  Once more I say, No other
voice in this wide waste world seems to my sad ear to be
_speaking_ at all at present.  The more is the pity for us.

I forbid you to plague yourself any farther with those
Philadelphia or other Booksellers.  If you could hinder them to
promulgate any copy of that frightful picture by Lawrence, or
indeed any picture at all, I had rather stand as a shadow than as
a falsity in the minds of my American friends:  but this too we
are prepared to encounter.  And as for the money of these men,--
if they will pay it, good and welcome;  if they will not pay it,
let them keep it with what blessing there may be in it!  I have
your noble offices in that and in other such matters already
unforgetably sure to me;  and, in real fact, that is almost
exactly the whole of valuable that could exist for me in the
affair.  Adieu, dear Friend.  Write to me again;  I will write
again at more leisure.

Yours always,
T. Carlyle




CII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I have seen Furness of Philadelphia, who was,
last week, in Boston, and inquired of him what account I should
send you of the new Philadelphia edition.  "Has not Mr. Carey
paid you?" he said.--No.  "Then has he not paid Carlyle
directly?"  No, as I believe, or I should have heard of it.--
Furness replied, that the promised fifty pounds were sure, and
that the debt would have been settled before this time, if Mr.
Carey had lived.  So as this is no longer a Three Blind
Callenders' business of Arabian Nights, I shall rest secure.  I
have doubted whether the bad name which Philadelphia has gotten
in these times would not have disquieted you in this long delay.
If you have ever heard directly from Carey and Hart, you will
inform me.

I am to read to a society in Boston presently some lectures,
--on Plato, or the Philosopher;  Swedenborg, or the Mystic;
Montaigne, or the Sceptic;  Shakespeare, or the Poet;  Napoleon,
or the Man of the World;--if I dare, and much lecturing makes us
incorrigibly rash.  Perhaps, before I end it, my list will be
longer, and the measure of presumption overflowed.  I may take
names less reverend than some of these,--but six lectures I have
promised.  I find this obligation usually a good spur to the
sides of that dull horse I have charge of.  But many of its
advantages must be regarded at a long distance.

I have heard nothing from you for a long time,--so may your
writing prosper the more.  I wish to hear, however, concerning
you, and your house, and your studies, when there is little to
tell.  The steamers come so fast--to exchange cards would not be
nothing.  My wife and children and my mother are well.  Peace and
love to your household.

R.W. Emerson




CIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I had hardly sent away my letter by the last
steamer, when yours full of good news arrived.  I greet you
heartily on the achievement of your task, and the new days of
freedom obtained and deserved.  Happiest, first, that you can
work, which seems the privilege of the great, and then, also,
that thereby you can come at the sweetness of victory and rest.
Yes, flee to the country, ride, run, leap, sit, spread yourself
at large;  and in all ways celebrate the immense benevolence of
the Universe towards you;  and never complain again of dyspepsia,
crosses, or the folly of men;  for in giving you this potent
concentration, what has been withholden?  I am glad with all men
that a new book is made, that the gentle creation as well as the
grosser goes ever on.  Another month will bring it to me, and I
shall know the secrets of these late silent years.  Welcome the
child of my friend!  Why should I regret that I see you not, when
you are forced thus intimately to discover yourself beyond the
intimacy of conversation?

But you should have sent me out the sheets by the last steamer,
or a manuscript copy of the book.  I do not know but Munroe would
have printed it at once, and defied the penny press.  And slow
Time might have brought in his hands a most modest reward.

I wrote you the other day the little I had to say on affairs.
Clark, the financial Conscience, has never yet made any report,
though often he promised.  Half the year he lives out of Boston,
and unless I go to his Bank I never see his face.  I think he
will not die till he have disburdened himself of this piece of
arithmetic.  I pray you to send me my copy of this book at the
earliest hour, and to offer my glad congratulations to Jane
Carlyle, on an occasion, I am sure, of great peace and relief to
her spirit.  And so farewell.

R.W. Emerson




CIV. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--I have had two Letters from you since I wrote
any;  the latest of them was lying here for me when I returned,
about three weeks ago;  the other I had received in Scotland:  it
was only the last that demanded a special answer;--which, alas, I
meant faithfully to give it, but did not succeed!  With meet
despatch I made the Bookseller get ready for you a Copy of the
unpublished _Cromwell_ Book;  hardly complete as yet, it was
nevertheless put together, and even some kind of odious rudiments
of a _Portrait_ were bound up with it;  and the Packet inscribed
with your address was put into Wiley and Putnam's hands in time
for the Mail Steamer;--and I hope has duly arrived?  If it have
not, pray set the Booksellers a-hunting.  Wiley and Putnam was
the Carrier's name;  this is all the indication I can give, but
this, I hope, if indeed any prove needful, will be enough.  One
may hope you have the Book already in your hands, a fortnight
before this reaches you, a month before any other Copy can reach
America.  In which case the Parcel, _without_ any Letter, must
have seemed a little enigmatic to you!  The reason was this:  I
miscounted the day of the month, unlucky that I was.  Sitting
down one morning with full purpose to write at large, and
all my tools round me, I discover that it is no longer
the third of November;  that it is already the _fourth,_
and the American Mail-Packet has already lifted anchor!
Irrevocable, irremediable!  Nothing remained but to wait for
the 18th;--and now, as you see, to take Time by the forelock,--
_queue,_ as we all know, he has none.

My visit to Scotland was wholesome for me, tho' full of sadness,
as the like always is.  Thirty years mow away a Generation of
Men.  The old Hills, the old Brooks and Houses, are still there;
but the Population has marched away, almost all;  it is not there
any more.  I cannot enter into light talk with the survivors and
successors;  I withdraw into silence, and converse with the old
dumb crags rather, in a melancholy and abstruse manner.--Thank
God, my good old Mother is still there;  old and frail, but still
young of heart;  as young and strong _there,_ I think, as ever.
It is beautiful to see affection survive where all else is
submitting to decay;  the altar with its sacred fire still
burning when the outer walls are all slowly crumbling;  material
Fate saying, "_They_ are mine!"--I read some insignificant Books;
smoked a great deal of tobacco;  and went moping about among the
hills and hollow water-courses, somewhat like a shade in Hades.
The Gospel which this World of Fact does preach to one differs
considerably from the sugary twaddle one gets the offer of in
Exeter-Hall and other Spouting-places!  Of which, in fact, I am
getting more and more weary;  sometimes really impatient.  It
seems to me the reign of Cant and Spoonyism has about lasted long
enough.  Alas, in many respects, in this England I too often feel
myself sorrowfully in a "minority of one";--if in the whole
world, it amount to a minority of two, that is something!  These
words of Goethe often come into my mind, _"Verachtung ja Nicht-
achtung."_  Lancashire, with its Titanic Industries, with its
smoke and dirt, and brutal stupor to all but money and the five
mechanical Powers, did not excite much admiration in me;
considerably less, I think, than ever!  Patience, and shuffle
the cards!

The Book on Cromwell is not to come out till the 22d of this
month.  For many weeks it has been a real weariness to me;  my
hope, always disappointed, that now is the last time I shall have
any trade with it.  Even since I began writing, there has been an
Engraver here, requiring new indoctrination,--poor fellow!  Nay,
in about ten days it _must_ be over:  let us not complain.  I
feel it well to be worth _nothing,_ except for the little
fractions or intermittent fits of pious industry there really
were in it;  and my one wish is that the human species would be
pleased to take it off my hands, and honestly let me hear no more
about it!  If it please Heaven, I will rest awhile still, and
then try something better.

In three days hence, my Wife and I are off to the Hampshire coast
for a winter visit to kind friends there, if in such a place it
will prosper long with us.  The climate there is greatly better
than ours;  they are excellent people, well affected to us;  and
can be lived with, though of high temper and ways!  They are the
Lord Ashburtons, in fact;  more properly the younger stratum of
that house;  partly a kind of American people,--who know Waldo
Emerson, among other fine things, very well!  I think we are to
stay some three weeks:  the bustle of moving is already begun.

You promise us a new Book soon?  Let it be soon, then.  There are
many persons here that will welcome it now.  To one man here it
is ever as an _articulate voice_ amid the infinite cackling and
cawing.  That remains my best definition of the effect it has on
me.  Adieu, my friend.  Good be with you and your Household
always.  _Vale._

T.C.




CV. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--I received your Letter by the last Packet three
or four days ago:  this is the last day of answering, the monthly
Packet sails towards you again from Liverpool tomorrow morning;
and I am in great pressure with many writings, elsewhither and
thither:  therefore I must be very brief.  I have just written to
Mr. Hart of Philadelphia;  his Draft (as I judge clearly by the
Banker's speech and silence) is accepted, all right;  and in
fact, means _money_ at this time:  for which I have written to
thank him heartily.  Do you very heartily thank Mr. Furness for
me;--Furness and various friends, as Transatlantic matters now
are, must accept a _silent_ gratitude from me.  The speech of men
and American hero-worshipers is grown such a babblement:  in very
truth, _silence_ is the thing that chiefly has meaning,--there
or here....

To my very great astonishment, the Book _Cromwell_ proves popular
here;  and there is to be another edition very soon.  Edition
with improvements--for some fifty or so of new (not _all_
insignificant) Letters have turned up, and I must try to do
something rational with them;--with which painful operation I am
again busy.  It will make the two volumes about _equal_ perhaps,
--which will be one benefit!  If any American possibility lie in
this, I will take better care of it.--Alas, I have not got one
word with you yet!  Tell me of your Lectures;--of all things.
Ever yours,
T. Carlyle

We returned from Hampshire exactly a week ago;  never passed
six so totally idle weeks in our lives.--Better in health a
little?  Perhaps.




CVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--One word to you before the Packet sail;--on
business of my own, once more;  in such a state of _haste_ as
could hardly be greater.  The Printers are upon me, and I have
not a moment.

Contrary to all human expectation, this Book on Cromwell proves
salable to mankind here, and a second Edition is now going
forward with all speed.  The publication of the First has brought
out from their recesses a _new_ heap of Cromwell Letters;--which
have been a huge embarrassment to me;  for they are highly
unimportant for most part, and do not tend to alter or materially
modify anything.  Some Fifty or Sixty new Letters in all (many of
them from Printed Books that had escaped me) the great majority,
with others yet that may come in future time, I determine to
print simply as an Appendix;  but several too, I think about
twenty in all, are to be fitted into the Text, chiefly in the
early part of the First Volume, as tending to bring some matters
into greater clearness there.  I am busy with that even now;
sunk deep into the Dust-abysses again!--Of course I have made
what provision I could for printing a Supplement, &c. to the
possessors of the First Edition:  but I find this Second will be
the _Final_ standing Edition of the Book;  decidedly preferable
to the First;  not to be touched by me _again,_ except on
very good cause indeed.  New letters, except they expressly
contradict me, shall go at once into the back apartment, or
Appendix, in future.

The Printers have sent me some five or six sheets, they send me
hitherto a sheet daily;  but perhaps there are not above three or
two in a perfect state:  so I trouble you with none of them by
this Packet.  But by next Packet (3d of March), unless I hear to
the contrary, I will send you all the Sheets that are ready;  and
so by the following Packets, till we are out of it;--that you, on
the scene there, may do with them once for all whatsoever you
like.  If _nothing_ can be done with them, believe me I shall be
very glad of that result.  But if you can so much as oblige any
honest Bookseller of your or my acquaintance by the gift of them,
let it be done;  let Pirates and ravenous Bipeds of Prey
be excluded from participating:  that of itself will be a
comfortable and a proper thing!--You are hereby authorized to
promulgate in any way you please, That the Second Edition will be
augmented, corrected, as aforesaid;  and that Mr. (Any Son of
Adam you please to name) is, so far as I have any voice in the
matter, appointed by me, to the exclusion of all and sundry
others on what pretext soever, to print and vend the same to my
American Friends.  And so it stands;  and the Sheets (probably
near thirty in number) will be out with the March Packet:--
and if nothing can come of it, I for one shall be very glad!
The Book is to be in Three Volumes now;  the first ends at
p. 403, Vol. I.;  the third begins at p. 155, Vol. II., of
the present edition.

What are you doing?  Write to me:  how the Lectures went, how all
things went and go!  We are over head and ears in Anti-Corn-Law
here;  the Aristocracy struck almost with a kind of horror at
sight of that terrible Millocracy, rising like a huge hideous
Frankenstein up in Lancashire,--seemingly with boundless ready-
money in its pocket, and a very fierce humor in its stomach!  To
me it is as yet almost uglier than the Aristocracy;  and I will
not fire guns when this small victory is gained;  I will
recommend a day of Fasting rather, that such a victory required
such gaining.

Adieu, my Friend.  Is it likely we shall meet in "Oregon," think
you?  That would be a beautiful affair, on the part of the most
enlightened Nation!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CVII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--I must write you a word before this Packet go,
tho' my haste is very great.  I received your two Newspapers
(price only twopence);  by the same Ship there came, and reached
me some days later, a Letter from Mr. Everett enclosing the
_Cromwell_ portions of the same printed-matter, clipt out by
scissors;  written, it appeared, by Mr. Everett's nephew;  some
of whose remarks, especially his wish that I might once be in New
England, and see people "praying," amused me much!  The Cotton
Letter, &c., I have now got to the bottom of;  Birch's copy is in
the Museum here,--a better edition than I had.  Of "Levered" and
the other small American Documents--alas, I get cartloads of the
like or better tumbled down at my door, and my chief duty is to
front them resolutely with a _shovel._  "Ten thousand tons" is
but a small estimate for the quantity of loose and indurated
lumber I have had to send sounding, on each hand of me, down,
down to the eternal deeps, never to trouble _me_ more!  The
jingle of it, as it did at last get under way, and go down, was
almost my one consolation in those unutterable operations.--I am
again over head and ears;  but shall be out soon:  never to
return more.

By this Packet, according to volunteer contract, there goes out
by the favor of your Chapman a number of sheets, how many I do
not exactly know, of the New Edition:  Chapman First and Chapman
Second (yours and mine) have undertaken to manage the affair for
this month and for the following months;--many thanks to them
both for taking it out of my hands.  What you are to do with the
Article you already know.  If no other customer present himself,
can you signify to Mr. Hart of Philadelphia that the sheets are
much at his service,--his conduct on another occasion having
given him right to such an acknowledgment from me?  Or at any
rate, _you_ will want a new Copy of this Book;  and can retain
the sheets for that object.--Enough of them.

From Mr. Everett I learn that your Boston Lectures have been
attended with renown enough:  when are the Lectures themselves to
get to print?  I read, last night, an Essay on you, by a kind of
"Young Scotland," as we might call it, in an Edinburgh Magazine;
very fond of you, but shocked that you were Antichristian:--
really not so bad.  The stupidities of men go crossing one
another;  and miles down, at the bottom of all, there is a little
veinlet of sense found running at last!

If you see Mr. Everett, will you thank him for his kind
remembrance of me, till I find leisure (as I have vainly hoped
today to do) to thank him more in form.  A dignified, compact
kind of man;  whom I remember with real pleasure.

Jargon abounds in our Newspapers and Parliament Houses at
present;--with which "the present Editor," and indeed I think the
Public at large, takes little concern, beyond the regret of being
_bored_ by it.  The Corn-Laws are going very quietly the way of
all deliriums;  and then there will at least be one delirium
less, and we shall start upon new ones.

Not a word more today, but my blessings and regards.  God be with
you and yours always.

Ever your affectionate,
T. Carlyle




CVIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Your two Letters have both come to hand, the last
of them only three days ago.  One word in answer before the
Packet sail;  one very hasty word, rather than none.

You have made the best of Bargains for me;  once again, with the
freest contempt of trouble on my behalf;  which I cannot
sufficiently wonder at!  Apparently it is a fixed-idea of yours
that the Bibliopolic Genus shall not cheat me;  and you are
decided to make it good.  Very well:  let it be so, in as far as
the Fates will.

Certainly I will conform in all points to this Wiley-and-Putnam
Treaty, and faithfully observe the same.  The London Wileys have
not yet sent me any tidings;  but when they do, I will say Your
terms on the other side of the sea are the Law to us, and it is a
finished thing.--No sheets, I think, will go by this mid-month
Packet, the Printer and Bookseller were bidden not mind that:
but by the Packet of May 3d, I hope the Second Volume will go
complete;  and, if the Printers make speed, almost the whole
remainder may go by the June one.  There is to be a "Supplement
to the First Edition," containing all the new matter that is
_separable:_  of this too the Wileys shall have their due Copy to
reprint:  it is what I could do to keep my faith with purchasers
of the First Edition here;  but, on the whole, there will be no
emulating of the Second Edition except by a reprint of the whole
of it;  changes great and small have had to introduce themselves
everywhere, as these new Letters were woven in.--I hope before
May 3d I shall have ascertained whether it will not be the
simplest way (as with my present light it clearly appears) to
give the sheets direct to the Wiley and Putnam here, and let
_them_ send them?  In any case, the cargo shall come one way
or other.

Furthermore,--Yes, you shall have that sun-shadow, a
Daguerreotype likeness, as the sun shall please to paint it:
there has often been talk of getting me to that establishment,
but I never yet could go.  If it be possible, we will have this
also ready for the 3d of May.  _Provided_ you, as you promise, go
and do likewise!  A strange moment that, when I look upon your
dead shadow again;  instead of the living face, which remains
unchanged within me, enveloped in beautiful clouds, and emerging
now and then into strange clearness!  Has your head grown
grayish?  On me are "gray hairs here and there,"--and I do "know
it."  I have lived half a century in this world, fifty years
complete on the 4th of December last:  that is a solemn fact
for me!  Few and evil have been the days of the years of
thy servant,--few for any good that was ever done in them.
_Ay de mi!_

Within late weeks I have got my Horse again;  go riding through
the loud torrent of vehiculatory discords, till I get into the
fields, into the green lanes;  which is intrinsically a great
medicine to me.  Most comfortless riding it is, with a horse of
such _kangaroo_ disposition, till I do get to the sight of my old
ever-young green-mantled mother again;  but for an hour there, it
is a real blessing to me.  I have company sometimes, but
generally prefer solitude, and a dialogue with the trees and
clouds.  Alas, the speech of men, especially the witty-speech of
men, is oftentimes afflictive to me:  "in the wide Earth," I say
sometimes with a sigh, "there is none but Emerson that responds
to me with a voice wholly human!"  All "Literature" too is become
I cannot tell you how contemptible to me.  On the whole, one's
blessedness is to do as Oliver:  Work while the sun is up;  work
_well_ as if Eternities depended on it;  and then sleep,--if
under the guano-mountains of Human Stupor, if handsomely
_forgotten_ all at once, that latter is the handsome thing!  I
have often thought what W. Shakespeare would say, were he to sit
one night in a "Shakespeare Society," and listen to the empty
twaddle and other long-eared melody about him there!--Adieu, my
Friend.  I fear I have forgotten many things:  at all events, I
have forgotten the inexorable flight of the minutes, which are
numbered out to me at present.

Ever yours,
T. Carlyle

  I think I recognize the Inspector of Wild-beasts, in the
little Boston Newspaper you send!  A small hatchet-faced, gray-
eyed, good-humored Inspector, who came with a Translated
Lafontaine;  and took his survey not without satisfaction?
Comfortable too how rapidly he fathomed the animal, having just
poked him up a little.  _Ach Gott!_  Man is forever interesting
to men;--and all men, even Hatchet-faces, are globular and complete!




CIX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Here is the _Photograph_ going off for you by
Bookseller Munroe of Boston;  the Sheets of _Cromwell,_ all the
second and part of the last volume, are to go direct to New York:
both Parcels by the Putnam conveyance.  For Putnam has been here
since I wrote, making large confirmations of what you conveyed to
me;  and large Proposals of an ulterior scope,--which will
involve you in new trouble for me.  But it is trouble you will
not grudge, inasmuch as it promises to have some issue of moment;
at all events the negotiation is laid entirely into your hands:
therefore I must with all despatch explain to you the essentials
of it, that you may know what Wiley says when he writes to you
from New York.

Mr. Putnam, really a very intelligent, modest, and reputable-
looking little fellow, got at last to sight of me about a week
ago;--explained with much earnestness how the whole origin of the
mistake about the First Edition of _Cromwell_ had lain with
Chapman, my own Bookseller (which in fact I had already perceived
to be the case);  and farther set forth, what was much more
important, that he and his Partner were, and had been, ready and
desirous to _make good_ said mistake, in the amplest, most
satisfactory manner,--by the ready method of paying me _now_
ten percent on the selling-price of all the copies of _Cromwell_
sent into the market by them;  and had (as I knew already)
covenanted with you to do so, in a clear, _bona-fide,_ and to
you satisfactory manner, in regard to that First Edition:  in
consequence of which you had made a bargain with them of like
tenor in regard to the Second.  To all which I could only answer,
that such conduct was that of men of honor, and would, in all
manner of respects, be satisfactory to me.  Wherefore the new
Sheets of _Cromwell_ should now go by _his_ Package direct to New
York, and the other little Parcel for you he could send to
Munroe:--that as one consequence?  "Yes, surely," intimated he;
but there were other consequences, of more moment, behind that.

Namely, that they wanted (the Wiley & Putnam house did) to
publish certain other Books of mine, the List of which I do not
now recollect;  under similar conditions: viz. that I was to
certify, in a line or two prefixable to each Book, that I had
read it over in preparation for their Printer, and did authorize
them to print and sell it;--in return for which Ten percent on
the sale-price (and all manner of facilities, volunteered to
convince even Clark of Boston, the Lynx-eyed Friend now busy for
me looking through millstones, that all was straight, and said
Ten percent actually paid on every copy sold);  This was Putnam's
Offer, stated with all transparency, and in a way not to be
misunderstood by either of us.

To which I answered that the terms seemed clear and square and
every way good, and such as I could comply with heartily,--so far
as I was at liberty, but not farther.  Not farther:  for example,
there was Hart of Philadelphia (I think the Wileys do not want
the _Miscellanies_), there were Munroe, Little and Brown, &c.;--
in short, there was R.W. Emerson, who knew in all ways how far I
was free and not free, and who would take care of my integrity
and interest at once, and do what was just and prudent;  and to
_him_ I would refer the whole question, and whatever he engaged
for, that and no other than that I would do.  So that you see how
it is, and what a coil you have again got into!  Mr. Putnam would
have had some "Letter," some "exchange of Letters," to the effect
above-stated:  but I answered, "It was better we did not write at
all till the matter was clear and liquid with you, and then we
could very swiftly write,--and act.  I would apprise you how the
matter stood, and expect your answer, and bid you covenant with
Mr. Wiley what you found good, prompt I to fulfil whatever _you_
undertook for me."--This _is_ a true picture of the affair, the
very truest I can write in haste;  and so I leave it with you--
_Ach Gott!_

If your Photograph succeed as well as mine, I shall be almost
_tragically_ glad of it.  This of me is far beyond all pictures;
really very like:  I got Laurence the Painter to go with me, and
he would not let the people off till they had actually made a
likeness.  My Wife has got another, which she asserts to be much
"more amiable-looking," and even liker!  O my Friend, it is a
strange Phantasmagory of a Fact, this huge, tremendous World of
ours, Life of ours!  Do you bethink you of Craigenputtock, and
the still evening there?  I could burst into tears, if I had that
habit:  but it is of no use.  The Cromwell business will be ended
about the end of May,--I do hope!

You say not a word of your own affairs:  I have vaguely been
taught to look for some Book shortly;--what of it?  We are well,
or tolerably well, and the summer is come:  adieu.  Blessings on
you and yours.

T.C.



CX. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Friend,--I daily expect the picture, and wonder--so long as
I have wished it--I had never asked it before.  I was in Boston
the other day, and went to the best reputed Daguerreotypist, but
though I brought home three transcripts of my face, the house-
mates voted them rueful, supremely ridiculous.  I must sit again;
or, as true Elizabeth Hoar said, I must not sit again, not being
of the right complexion which Daguerre and iodine delight in.  I
am minded to try once more, and if the sun will not take me, I
must sit to a good crayon sketcher, Mr. Cheney, and send you
his draught....

Good rides to you and the longest escapes from London streets.  I
too have a new plaything, the best I ever had,--a wood-lot.  Last
fall I bought a piece of more than forty acres, on the border of
a little lake half a mile wide and more,  called Walden Pond,--a
place to which my feet have for years been accustomed to bring me
once or twice a week at all seasons.  My lot to be sure is on the
further side of the water, not so familiar to me as the nearer
shore.  Some of the wood is an old growth, but most of it has
been cut off within twenty years and is growing thriftily.  In
these May days, when maples, poplars, oaks, birches, walnut, and
pine are in their spring glory, I go thither every afternoon, and
cut with my hatchet an Indian path through the thicket all along
the bold shore, and open the finest pictures.

My two little girls know the road now, though it is nearly two
miles from my house, and find their way to the spring at the foot
of a pine grove, and with some awe to the ruins of a village of
shanties, all overgrown with mullein, which the Irish who built
the railroad left behind them.  At a good distance in from the
shore the land rises to a rocky head, perhaps sixty feet above
the water.  Thereon I think to place a hut;  perhaps it will have
two stories and be a petty tower, looking out to Monadnoc and
other New Hampshire Mountains.  There I hope to go with book and
pen when good hours come.  I shall think there, a fortnight might
bring you from London to Walden Pond.--Life wears on, and do you
say the gray hairs appear?  Few can so well afford them.  The
black have not hung over a vacant brain, as England and America
know;  nor, white or black, will it give itself any Sabbath for
many a day henceforward, as I believe.  What have we to do with
old age?  Our existence looks to me more than ever initial.  We
have come to see the ground and look up materials and tools.  The
men who have any positive quality are a flying advance party for
reconnoitring.  We shall yet have a right work, and kings for
competitors.  With ever affectionate remembrance to your wife,
your friend,

R.W. Emerson




CXI. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--It is late at night and I have postponed writing
not knowing but that my parcel would be ready to go,--and now a
public meeting and the speech of a rarely honest and eloquent man
have left me but a span of time for the morning's messenger.

The photograph came safely, to my thorough content.  I have what
I have wished.  This head is to me out of comparison more
satisfying than any picture.  I confirm my recollections and I
make new observations;  it is life to life.  Thanks to the Sun.
This artist remembers what every other forgets to report, and
what I wish to know, the true sculpture of the features, the
angles, the special organism, the rooting of the hair, the form
and the placing of the head.  I am accustomed to expect of the
English a securing of the essentials in their work, and the sun
does that, and you have done it in this portrait, which gives me
much to think and feel.  I was instantly stirred to an emulation
of your love and punctuality, and, last Monday, which was my
forty-third birthday, I went to a new Daguerreotypist, who took
much pains to make his picture right.  I brought home three
shadows not agreeable to my own eyes.  The machine has a bad
effect on me.  My wife protests against the imprints as
slanderous.  My friends say they look ten years older, and, as I
think, with the air of a decayed gentleman touched with his first
paralysis.  However I got yesterday a trusty vote or two for
sending one of them to you, on the ground that I am not likely to
get a better.  But it now seems probable that it will not get
cased and into the hands of Harnden in time for the steamer
tomorrow.  It will then go by that of the 16th.

I am heartily glad that you are in direct communication with
these really energetic booksellers, Wiley and Putnam.  I
understood from Wiley's letter to me, weeks ago, that their
ambition was not less than to have a monopoly of your books.  I
answered, it is very desirable for us too;  saving always the
rights of Mr. Hart in Philadelphia.--I told him you had no
interest in Munroe's _Sartor,_ which from the first was his own
adventure, and Little and Brown had never reprinted _Past and
Present_ or _Chartism._  The _French Revolution, Past and
Present, Chartism,_ and the _Sartor,_ I see no reason why they
should not have.  Munroe and L. & B. have no real claims, and I
will speak to them.  But there is one good particular in Putnam's
proffer to you, which Wiley has not established in his (first and
last) agreement with me, namely, that you shall have an interest
in what is already sold of their first edition of _Cromwell._  By
all means close with Putnam of the good mind, exempting only
Hart's interest.  I have no recent correspondence with Wiley and
Putnam.  And I greatly prefer that they should deal directly
with you.  Yet it were best to leave an American reference open
for audit and umpirage to the stanch E.P. Clark of the New
England Bank.

Ever yours,
R.W. Emerson




CXII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--I have had two letters of yours, the last of them
(31st May) only two days, and have seen a third written to Wiley
of New York.  Yesterday Putnam was here, and we made our
bargain,--and are to have it signed this day at his Shop:  two
copies, one of which I mean to insert along with this, and give
up to your or E.P. Clark's keeping.  For, as you will see, I have
appointed Clark my representative, economic plenipotentiary and
factotum, if he will consent to act in that sublime capacity,--
subject always to your advice, to your control in all _ultra_-
economic respects, of which you alone are cognizant of the
circumstances or competent to give a judgment.  Pray explain this
with all lucidity to Mr. Clark:  and endeavor to impress upon him
that it is (to all appearance) a real affair of business we are
now engaged in;  that I would have him satisfy his own sharp eyes
(by such methods as he finds convenient and sufficient, by
examination at New York or how he can) that the conditions of
this bargain _are_ fairly complied with by the New York
Booksellers,--who promise "every facility for ascertaining _how
many_ copies are printed," &c., &c.;  and profess to be of the
integrity of Israelites indeed, in all respects whatever!  If so,
it may be really useful to us.  And I would have Mr. Clark, if he
will allow me to look upon him as my _man of business_ in this
affair, take reasonable pains, be at any reasonable expense, &c.
(by himself or by deputy) to ascertain that it is so in very
fact!  In that case, if something come of it, we shall get the
something and be thankful;  if nothing come of it, we shall have
the pleasure of caring nothing about it.--I have given Putnam two
Books (_Heroes_ and _Sartor_) ready, corrected;  the others I
think will follow in the course of next month;--F. _Revolution_
waits only for an Index which my man is now busy with.  The
_Cromwell,_ Supplement and all, he has now got,--published two
days ago, after sorrowful delays.  Your Copy will be ready _this
afternoon,_--too late, I fear, by just one day:  it will lie, in
that case, for a fortnight, and then come.  Wiley will find that
he has no resource but to reprint the Book;  he will reprint the
Supplement too, in justice to former purchasers;  but this is the
_final_ form of the Book, this second edition;  and to this all
readers of it will come at last.

We expect the Daguerreotype by next Steamer;  but you take good
care not to prepossess us on its behalf!  In fact, I believe, the
only satisfactory course will be to get a Sketch done too;  if
you have any Painter that can manage it tolerably, pray set about
that, as the true solution of the business--out of the two
together we shall make a likeness for ourselves that will do.
Let the Lady Wife be satisfied with it;  then we shall pronounce
it genuine!--

I envy you your forest-work, your summer umbrages, and clear
silent lakes.  The weather here is getting insupportable to us
for heat.  Indeed, if rain do not come within two weeks, I
believe we must wind up our affairs, and make for some shady
place direct:--Scotland is perhaps likeliest;  but nothing yet is
fixed:  you shall duly hear.--Directly after this, I set off for
Putnam's in Waterloo Place;  sign his paper there;  stick one
copy under a cover for you, and despatch.--Send me word about all
that you are doing and thinking.  Be busy, be still and happy.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CXIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I received by the last steamer your letter with
the copy of the covenant with Wiley and Putnam, which seems
unexceptionable.  I like the English side of those men very well;
that is, Putnam seems eager to stand well and rightly with his
fellow-men.  Wiley at New York it was who provoked me, last
winter, to write him an angry letter when he declared his
intention to reprint our new matter without paying for it.  When
he thought better of it, and came to terms, I had not got so far
as to be affectionate, and have never yet resumed the
correspondence I had with him a year ago, about my own books.  I
hope you found my letter to them, though I do not remember which,
properly cross.  I believe I only enumerated difficulties.  I
have talked with Little and Brown about their editions of
_Chartism,_ and _Past and Present;_  they have made no new sales
of the books since they were printed on by the pirates, and say
that the books lie still on their shelves, as also do a few
copies of the London and Boston edition of _French Revolution._
I prayed them immediately to dispose of these things by auction,
or at their trade sales, at whatever prices would sell them, and
leave the market open for W. & P.;  which they promise to do.

To Munroe I went, and learn that he has bought the stereotype-
plates of the New York pirate edition of _Sartor,_ and means to
print it immediately.  He is willing to stop if W. & P. will buy
of him his plates at their cost.  I wrote so to them, but they
say no.  And I have not spoken again with Munroe.  I was in town
yesterday, and carried the copy of the Covenant to E.P. Clark,
and read him your message.  His Bank occupies him entirely just
now, for his President is gone to Europe, and Clark's duties are
the more onerous.  But finding that the new responsibilities
delegated to him are light and tolerable, and, at any rate,
involve no retrospection, he very cheerfully signified his
readiness to serve you, and I graciously forbore all allusions to
my heap of booksellers' accounts which he has had in keeping now
--for years, I believe.  He told me that he hopes at no distant
day to have a house of his own,--he and his wife are always at
board,--and, whenever that happens, he intends to devote a
chamber in it to his "Illustrations of Mr. Carlyle's Writings,"
which, I believe, I have told you before, are a very large and
extraordinary collection of prints, pictures, books, and
manuscripts.  I sent you the promised Daguerrotype with all
unwillingness, by the steamer, I think of 16 June.  On 1 August,
Margaret Fuller goes to England and the Continent;  and I shall
not fail to write to you by her, and you must not fail to give a
good and faithful interview to this wise, sincere, accomplished,
and most entertaining of women.  I wish to bespeak Jane Carlyle's
friendliest ear to one of the noblest of women.  We shall send
you no other such.

I was lately inquired of again by an agent of a huge Boston
society of young men, whether Mr. Carlyle would not come to
America and read Lectures, on some terms which they could
propose.  I advised them to make him an offer, and a better one
than they had in view.  Joy and Peace to you in your new freedom.

R.W.E.



CXIV. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Since I wrote last to you, I think, with the
Wiley-and-Putnam Covenant enclosed,--the Photograph, after some
days of loitering at the Liverpool Custom-house, came safe to
hand.  Many thanks to you for this punctuality:  this poor
Shadow, it is all you could do at present in that matter!
But it must not rest there, no.  This Image is altogether
unsatisfactory, illusive, and even in some measure tragical
to me!  First of all, it is a bad Photograph;  no _eyes_
discernible, at least one of the eyes not, except in rare
favorable lights then, alas, Time itself and Oblivion must have
been busy.  I could not at first, nor can I yet with perfect
decisiveness, bring out any feature completely recalling to
me the old Emerson, that lighted on us from the Blue, at
Craigenputtock, long ago,--_eheu!_  Here is a genial, smiling,
energetic face, full of sunny strength, intelligence, integrity,
good humor;  but it lies imprisoned in baleful shades, as of the
valley of Death;  seems smiling on me as if in mockery.  "Dost
know me, friend?  I am dead, thou seest, and distant, and forever
hidden from thee;--I belong already to the Eternities, and thou
recognizest me not!"  On the whole, it is the strangest feeling I
have:--and practically the thing will be, that you get us by the
earliest opportunity some _living_ pictorial sketch, chalk-
drawing or the like, from a trustworthy hand;  and send _it_
hither to represent you.  Out of the two I shall compile for
myself a likeness by degrees:  but as for this present, we cannot
put up with it at all;  to my Wife and me, and to sundry other
parties far and near that have interest in it, there is no
satisfaction in this.  So there will be nothing for you but
compliance, by the first fair chance you have:  furthermore, I
bargain that the _Lady_ Emerson have, within reasonable limits, a
royal veto in the business (not absolute, if that threaten
extinction to the enterprise, but absolute within the limits of
possibility);  and that she take our case in hand, and graciously
consider what can and shall be done.  That will answer, I think.

Of late weeks I have been either idle, or sunk in the
sorrowfulest cobbling of old shoes again;  sorrowfully reading
over old Books for the Putnams and Chapmans, namely.  It is
really painful, looking in one's own old face;  said "old face"
no longer a thing extant now!--Happily I have at last finished
it;  the whole Lumber-troop with clothes duly brushed (_French
Revolution_ has even got an Index too) travels to New York in the
Steamer that brings you this.  _Quod faustum sit:_--or indeed I
do not much care whether it be faustum or not;  I grow to care
about an astonishingly small number of things as times turn with
me!  Man, all men seem radically _dumb;_  jabbering mere jargons
and noises from the teeth outwards;  the inner meaning of them,--
of them and of me, poor devils,--remaining shut, buried forever.
If almost all Books were burnt (my own laid next the coal), I
sometimes in my spleen feel as if it really would be better with
us!  Certainly could one generation of men be forced to live
without rhetoric, babblement, hearsay, in short with the tongue
well cut out of them altogether,--their fortunate successors
would find a most improved world to start upon!  For Cant does
lie piled on us, high as the zenith;  an Augean Stable with the
poisonous confusion piled so high:  which, simply if there once
could be nothing said, would mostly dwindle like summer snow
gradually about its business, and leave us free to use our eyes
again!  When I see painful Professors of Greek, poring in their
sumptuous Oxfords over dead _Greek_ for a thousand years or more,
and leaving live _English_ all the while to develop itself under
charge of Pickwicks and Sam Wellers, as if it were nothing and
the other were all things:  this, and the like of it everywhere,
fills me with reflections!  Good Heavens, will the people not
come out of their wretched Old-Clothes Monmouth-Streets, Hebrew
and other;  but lie there dying of the basest pestilence,--dying
and as good as dead!  On the whole, I am very weary of most
"Literature":--and indeed, in very sorrowful, abstruse humor
otherwise at present.

For remedy to which I am, in these very hours, preparing for a
sally into the green Country and deep silence;  I know not
altogether how or whitherward as yet;  only that I must tend
towards Lancashire;  towards Scotland at last.  My Wife already
waits me in Lancashire;  went off, in rather poor case, much
burnt by the hot Town, some ten days ago;  and does not yet
report much improvement.  I will write to you somewhere in my
wanderings.  The address, "Scotsbrig, Ecclefechan, N.B.," if you
chance to write directly or soon after this arrives, will,
likely, be the shortest:  at any rate, that, or "Cheyne Row"
either, is always sure enough to find me in a day or two
after trying.

By a kind of accident I have fallen considerably into American
History in these days;  and am even looking out for American
Geography to help me.  Jared Sparks, Marshall, &c. are hickory
and buckskin;  but I do catch a credible trait of human life from
them here and there;  Michelet's genial champagne _froth,_--alas,
I could find no fact in it that would stand handling;  and so
have broken down in the middle of _La France,_ and run over to
hickory and Jared for shelter!  Do you know Beriah Green?  A
body of Albany newspapers represent to me the people quarreling
in my name, in a very vague manner, as to the propriety of being
"governed," and Beriah's is the only rational voice among them.
Farewell, dear Friend.  Speedy news of you!

T. Carlyle




CXV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--The new edition of _Cromwell_ in its perfect
form and in excellent dress, and the copy of the Appendix, came
munificently safe by the last steamer.  When thought is best,
then is there most,--is a faith of which you alone among writing
men at this day will give me experience.  If it is the right
frankincense and sandal-wood, it is so good and heavenly to give
me a basketful and not a pinch.  I read proudly, a little at a
time, and have not yet got through the new matter.  But I think
neither the new letters nor the commentary could be spared.
Wiley and Putnam shall do what they can, and we will see if
New England will not come to reckon this the best chapter in
her Pentateuch.

I send this letter by Margaret Fuller, of whose approach I
believe I wrote you some word.  There is no foretelling how you
visited and crowded English will like our few educated men or
women, and in your learned populace my luminaries may easily be
overlooked.  But of all the travelers whom you have so kindly
received from me, I think of none, since Alcott went to England,
whom I so much desired that you should see and like, as this dear
old friend of mine.  For two years now I have scarcely seen her,
as she has been at New York, engaged by Horace Greeley as a
literary editor of his _Tribune_ newspaper.  This employment was
made acceptable to her by good pay, great local and personal
conveniences of all kinds, and unbounded confidence and respect
from Greeley himself, and all other parties connected with this
influential journal (of 30,000 subscribers, I believe).  And
Margaret Fuller's work as critic of all new books, critic of the
drama, of music, and good arts in New York, has been honorable to
her.  Still this employment is not satisfactory to me.  She is
full of all nobleness, and with the generosity native to her mind
and character appears to me an exotic in New England, a foreigner
from some more sultry and expansive climate.  She is, I suppose,
the earliest reader and lover of Goethe in this Country, and
nobody here knows him so well.  Her love too of whatever is good
in French, and specially in Italian genius, give her the best
title to travel.  In short, she is our citizen of the world by
quite special diploma.  And I am heartily glad that she has an
opportunity of going abroad that pleases her.

Mr. Spring, a merchant of great moral merits, (and, as I am
informed, an assiduous reader of your books,) has grown rich, and
resolves to see the world with his wife and son, and has wisely
invited Miss Fuller to show it to him.  Now, in the first place,
I wish you to see Margaret when you are in special good humor,
and have an hour of boundless leisure.  And I entreat Jane
Carlyle to abet and exalt and secure this satisfaction to me.  I
need not, and yet perhaps I need say, that M.F. is the safest of
all possible persons who ever took pen in hand.  Prince
Metternich's closet not closer or half so honorable.  In the next
place, I should be glad if you can easily manage to show her the
faces of Tennyson and of Browning.  She has a sort of right to
them both, not only because she likes their poetry, but because
she has made their merits widely known among our young people.
And be it known to my friend Jane Carlyle, whom, if I cannot see,
I delight to name, that her visitor is an immense favorite in the
parlor, as well as in the library, in all good houses where she
is known.  And so I commend her to you.

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




CXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--This is the 18th of the month, and it is a
frightful length of time, I know not how long, since I wrote to
you,--sinner that I am!  Truly we are in no case for paying debts
at present, being all sick more or less, from the hard cold
weather, and in a state of great temporary puddle but, as the
adage says, "one should own debt, and crave days";--therefore
accept a word from me, such as it may be.

I went, as usual, to the North Country in the Autumn;  passed
some two extremely disconsolate months,--for all things distress
a wretched thin-skinned creature like me,--in that old region,
which is at once an Earth and a Hades to me, an unutterable
place, now that I have become mostly a _ghost_ there!  I saw
Ireland too on my return, saw black potato-fields, a ragged noisy
population, that has long in a headlong baleful manner followed
the _Devil's_ leading, listened namely to blustering shallow-
violent Impostors and Children of Darkness, saying, "Yes, we know
_you,_ you are Children of Light!"--and so has fallen all out at
elbows in body and in soul;  and now having lost its _potatoes_
is come as it were to a crisis;  all its windy nonsense cracking
suddenly to pieces under its feet:  a very pregnant crisis
indeed!  A country cast suddenly into the melting-pot,--say into
the Medea's-Caldron;  to be boiled into horrid _dissolution;_
whether into new _youth,_ into sound healthy life, or into
eternal death and annihilation, one does not yet know!  Daniel
O'Connell stood bodily before me, in his green Mullaghmart Cap;
haranguing his retinue of Dupables:  certainly the most _sordid_
Humbug I have ever seen in this world;  the emblem to me, he and
his talk and the worship and credence it found, of all the
miseries that can befall a Nation.  I also conversed with Young
Ireland in a confidential manner;  for Young Ireland, really
meaning what it says, is worth a little talk:  the Heroism and
Patriotism of a new generation;  welling fresh and new from the
breasts of Nature;  and already poisoned by O'Connellism and the
_Old_ Irish atmosphere of bluster, falsity, fatuity, into one
knows not what.  Very sad to see.  On the whole, no man ought,
for any cause, to speak lies, or have anything to do with _lies;_
but either hold his tongue, or speak a bit of the truth:  that is
the meaning of a _tongue,_ people used to know!--Ireland was not
the place to console my sorrows.  I returned home very sad out of
Ireland;--and indeed have remained one of the saddest, idlest,
most useless of Adam's sons ever since;  and do still remain so.
I care not to _write_ anything more,--so it seems to me at
present.  I am in my vacant interlunar cave (I suppose that is
the truth);--and I ought to wrap my mantle round me, and lie, if
dark, _silent_ also.  But, alas, I have wasted almost all your
poor sheet first!--

Miss Fuller came duly as you announced;  was welcomed for your
sake and her own.  A high-soaring, clear, enthusiast soul;  in
whose speech there is much of all that one wants to find in
speech.  A sharp, subtle intellect too;  and less of that
shoreless Asiatic dreaminess than I have sometimes met with in
her writings.  We liked one another very well, I think, and the
Springs too were favorites.  But, on the whole, it could not be
concealed, least of all from the sharp female intellect, that
this Carlyle was a dreadfully heterodox, not to say a dreadfully
savage fellow, at heart;  believing no syllable of all that
Gospel of Fraternity, Benevolence, and _new_ Heaven-on-Earth,
preached forth by all manner of "advanced" creatures, from George
Sand to Elihu Burritt, in these days;  that in fact the said
Carlyle not only disbelieved all that, but treated it as
poisonous cant,--_sweetness_ of sugar-of-lead,--a detestable
_phosphorescence_ from the dead body of a Christianity, that
would not admit itself to be dead, and lie buried with all its
unspeakable putrescences, as a venerable dead one ought!--Surely
detestable enough.--To all which Margaret listened with much good
nature;  though of course with sad reflections not a few.--She
is coming back to us, she promises.  Her dialect is very
vernacular,--extremely exotic in the London climate.  If she do
not gravitate too irresistibly towards that class of New-Era
people (which includes whatsoever we have of prurient, esurient,
morbid, flimsy, and in fact pitiable and unprofitable, and is at
a sad discount among men of sense), she may get into good tracks
of inquiry and connection here, and be very useful to herself and
others.  I could not show her Alfred (he has been here since) nor
Landor:  but surely if I can I will,--that or a hundred times as
much as that,--when she returns.--They tell me you are about
collecting your Poems.  Well, though I do not approve of rhyme at
all, yet it is impossible Emerson in rhyme or prose can put down
any thought that was in his heart but I should wish to get into
mine.  So let me have the Book as fast as may be.  And do others
like it if you will take circumbendibuses for sound's sake!  And
excuse the Critic who seems to you so unmusical;  and say, It is
the nature of beast!  Adieu, dear Friend:  write to me, write
to me.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CXVII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Your letter came with a blessing last week.  I
had already learned from Margaret Fuller, at Paris, that you had
been very good and gentle to her;--brilliant and prevailing, of
course, but, I inferred, had actually restrained the volleys and
modulated the thunder, out of true courtesy and goodness of
nature, which was worthy of all praise in a spoiled conqueror at
this time of day.  Especially, too, she expressed a true
recognition and love of Jane Carlyle;  and thus her visit proved
a solid satisfaction;  to me, also, who think that few people
have so well earned their pleasures as she.

She wrote me a long letter;  she has been very happy in England,
and her time and strength fully employed.  Her description of you
and your discourse (which I read with lively curiosity also) was
the best I have had on that subject.

I tried hard to write you by the December steamer, to tell you
how forward was my book of  Poems;  but a little affair makes me
much writing.  I chanced to have three or four items of business
to despatch, when the steamer was ready to go, and you escaped
hearing of them.  I am the trustee of Charles Lane, who came out
here with Alcott and bought land, which, though sold, is not
paid for.

Somebody or somebodies in Liverpool and Manchester have proposed
once or twice, with more or less specification, that I should
come to those cities to lecture.  And who knows but I may come
one day?  Steam is strong, and Liverpool is near.  I should
find my account in the strong inducement of a new audience to
finish pieces which have lain waiting with little hope for months
or years.

Ah then, if I dared, I should be well content to add some golden
hours to my life in seeing you, now all full-grown and
acknowledged amidst your own people,--to hear and to speak is so
little yet so much.  But life is dangerous and delicate.  I
should like to see your solid England.  The map of Britain is
good reading for me.  Then I have a very ignorant love of
pictures, and a curiosity about the Greek statues and stumps in
the British Museum.  So beware of me, for on that distant day
when I get ready I shall come.

Long before this time you ought to have received from John
Chapman a copy of Emerson's Poems, so called, which he was
directed to send you.  Poor man, you need not open them.  I know
all you can say.  I printed them, not because I was deceived into
a belief that they were poems, but because of the softness or
hardness of heart of many friends here who have made it a point
to have them circulated.  Once having set out to print, I obeyed
the solicitations of John Chapman, of an ill-omened street in
London, to send him the book in manuscript, for the better
securing of copyright.  In printing them here I have corrected
the most unpardonable negligences, which negligences must be all
stereotyped under his fair London covers and gilt paper to the
eyes of any curious London reader;  from which recollection I
strive to turn away.

Little and Brown have just rendered me an account, by which it
appears that we are not quite so well off as was thought last
summer, when they said they had sold at auction the balance of
your books which had been lying unsold.  It seems now that the
books supposed to be sold were not all taken, and are returned to
them;  one hundred _Chartism,_ sixty-three _Past and Present._
Yet we are to have some eighty-three dollars ($83.68), which you
shall probably have by the next steamer.

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




CXVIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--The Steamer goes tomorrow;  I must, though in a
very dim condition, have a little word for you conveyed by it.
In the miscellaneous maw of that strange Steamer shall lie, among
other things, a friendly _word!_

Your very kind Letter lay waiting me here, some ten days ago;
doubly welcome, after so long a silence.  We had been in
Hampshire, with the Barings, where we were last year;--some four
weeks or more;  totally idle:  our winter had been, and indeed
still is, unusually severe;  my Wife's health in consequence was
sadly deranged;  but this idleness, these Isle-of-Wight sea-
breezes, have brought matters well round again;  so we cannot
grudge the visit or the idleness, which otherwise too might have
its uses.  Alas, at this time my normal state is to be altogether
_idle,_ to look out upon a very lonely universe, full of grim
sorrow, full of splendor too;  and not to know at all, for the
moment, on what side I am to attack it again!--I read your Book
of Poems all faithfully, at Bay House (our Hampshire quarters);
where the obstinate people,--with whom you are otherwise, in
prose, a first favorite,--foolishly _refused_ to let me read
aloud;  foolishly, for I would have made it mostly all plain by
commentary:--so I had to read for myself;  and can say, in spite
of my hard-heartedness, I did gain, though under impediments, a
real satisfaction and some tone of the Eternal Melodies sounding,
afar off, ever and anon, in my ear!  This is fact;  a truth in
Natural History;  from which you are welcome to draw inferences.
A grand View of the Universe, everywhere the sound (unhappily
_far of,_ as it were) of a valiant, genuine Human Soul:  this,
even under rhyme, is a satisfaction worth some struggling for.
But indeed you are very perverse;  and through this perplexed
undiaphanous element, you do not fall on me like radiant summer
rainbows, like floods of sunlight, but with thin piercing
radiances which affect me like the light of the _stars._  It is
so:  I wish you would become _concrete,_ and write in prose the
straightest way;  but under any form I must put up with you;
that is my lot.--Chapman's edition, as you probably know, is very
beautiful.  I believe there are enough of ardent silent seekers
in England to buy up this edition from him, and resolutely study
the same:  as for the review multitude, they dare not exactly
call it "unintelligible moonshine," and so will probably hold
their tongue.  It is my fixed opinion that we are all at sea as
to what is called Poetry, Art, &c., in these times;  laboring
under a dreadful incubus of _Tradition,_ and mere "Cant heaped
balefully on us up to the very Zenith," as men, in nearly all
other provinces of their Life, except perhaps the railway
province, do now labor and stagger;--in a word, that Goethe-and-
Schiller's _"Kunst"_ has far more brotherhood with Pusey-and-
Newman's _Shovelhattery,_ and other the like deplorable
phenomena, than it is in the least aware of!  I beg you take
warning:  I am more serious in this than you suppose.  But no,
you will not;  you whistle lightly over my prophecies, and go
your own stiff-necked road.  Unfortunate man!--

I had read in the Newspapers, and even heard in speech from
Manchester people, that you were certainly coming this very
summer to lecture among us:  but now it seems, in your Letter,
all postponed into the vague again.  I do not personally know
your Manchester negotiators, but I know in general that they are
men of respectability, insight, and activity;  much connected
with the lecturing department, which is a very growing one,
especially in Lancashire, at present;--men likely, for the rest,
to _fulfil_ whatsoever they may become engaged for to you.  My
own ignorant though confident guess, moreover, is, that you
would, in all senses of the word, _succeed_ there;  I think, also
rather confidently, we could promise you an audience of British
aristocracy in London here,--and of British commonalty all manner
of audiences that you liked to stoop to.  I heard an ignorant
blockhead (or mainly so) called --- bow-wowing here, some months
ago, to an audience of several thousands, in the City, one
evening,--upon Universal Peace, or some other field of
balderdash;  which the poor people seemed very patient of.  In a
word, I do not see what is to hinder you to come whenever you can
resolve upon it.  The adventure is perfectly promising:  an
adventure familiar to you withal;  for Lecturing is with us
fundamentally just what it is with you:  Much prurient curiosity,
with some ingenuous love of wisdom, an element of real reverence
for the same:  everywhere a perfect openness to any man speaking
in any measure things manful.  Come, therefore;  gird yourself
together, and come.  With little or no peradventure, you will
realize what your modest hope is, and more;--and I, for my share
of it, shall see you once again under this Sun!  O Heavens, there
_might_ be some good in that!  Nay, if you will travel like a
private quiet person, who knows but I, the most unlocomotive of
mortals, might be able to escort you up and down a little;  to
look at many a thing along with you, and even to open my long-
closed heart and speak about the same?--There is a spare-room
always in this House for you,--in this heart, in these two
hearts, the like:  bid me hope in this enterprise, in all manner
of ways where I can;  and on the whole, get it rightly put
together, and embark on it, and arrive!

The good Miss Fuller has painted us all _en beau,_ and your
smiling imagination has added new colors.  We have not a
triumphant life here;  very far indeed from that, _ach Gott!_--as
you shall see.  But Margaret is an excellent soul:  in real
regard with both of us here.  Since she went, I have been reading
some of her Papers in a new Book we have got:  greatly superior
to all I knew before;  in fact the undeniable utterances (now
first undeniable to me) of a true heroic mind;--altogether
unique, so far as I know, among the Writing Women of this
generation;  rare enough too, God knows, among the writing Men.
She is very narrow, sometimes;  but she is truly high:  honor to
Margaret, and more and more good-speed to her.--Adieu dear
Emerson.  I am ever yours,

T.C.



CXIX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Yesterday morning, setting out to breakfast with
Richard Milnes (Milnes's breakfast is a thing you will yet have
to experience) I met, by the sunny shore of the Thames, a
benevolent Son of Adam in blue coat and red collar, who thrust
into my hand a Letter from you.  A truly miraculous Son of Adam
in red collar, in the Sunny Spring Morning!--The Bill of
Seventeen Pounds is already far on its way to Dumfries, there to
be kneaded into gold by the due artists:  today is American Post-
day;  and already in huge hurry about many things, I am
scribbling you some word of answer.... The night _before_
Milnes's morning, I had furthermore seen your Manchester
Correspondent, Ireland,--an old Edinborough acquaintance too, as
I found.  A solid, dark, broad, rather heavy man;  full of
energy, and broad sagacity and practicality;--infinitely well
affected to the man Emerson too.  It was our clear opinion that
you might come at any time with ample assurance of "succeeding,"
so far as wages went, and otherwise;  that you ought to come, and
must, and would,--as he, Ireland, would farther write to you.
There is only one thing I have to add of my own, and beg you to
bear in mind,--a date merely.  _Videlicet,_ That the time for
lecturing to the London West-End, I was given everywhere to
understand, is _from the latter end of April_ (or say April
altogether) _to the end of May:_  this is a fixed Statistic fact,
all men told me:  of this you are in all arrangements to keep
mind.  For it will actually do your heart good to look into the
faces, and speak into minds, of really Aristocratic Persons,--
being one yourself, you Sinner,--and perhaps indeed this will be
the greatest of all the _novelties_ that await you in your
voyage.  Not to be seen, I believe, at least never seen by me in
any perfection, except in London only.  From April to the end of
May;  during those weeks you must be _here,_ and free:  remember
that date.  Will you come in Winter then, next Winter,--or when?
Ireland professed to know you by the Photograph too;  which I
never yet can.--I wrote by last Packet:  enough here.  Your
friend Cunningham has not presented himself;  shall be right
welcome when he does,--as all that in the least belong to you may
well hope to be.  Adieu.  Our love to you all.

Ever Yours,
T. Carlyle



CXX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I have two good letters from you, and until now
you have had no acknowledgment.  Especially I ought to have told
you how much pleasure your noble invitation in March gave me.
This pleasing dream of going to England dances before me
sometimes.  It would be, I then fancy, that stimulation which my
capricious, languid, and languescent study needs.  At home, no
man makes any proper demand on me, and the audience I address is
a handful of men and women too widely scattered than that they
can dictate to me that which they are justly entitled to say.
Whether supercilious or respectful, they do not say anything that
can be heard.  Of course, I have only myself to please, and my
work is slighted as soon as it has lost its first attraction.  It
is to be hoped, if one should cross the sea, that the terror of
your English culture would scare the most desultory of Yankees
into precision and fidelity;  and perhaps I am not yet too old to
be animated by what would have seemed to my youth a proud
privilege.  If you shall fright me into labor and concentration,
I shall win my game;  for I can well afford to pay any price to
get my work well done.  For the rest, I hesitate, of course, to
rush rudely on persons that have been so long invisible angels to
me.  No reasonable man but must hold these bounds in awe:--I--
much more,--who am of a solitary habit, from my childhood until
now.--I hear nothing again from Mr. Ireland.  So I will let the
English Voyage hang as an afternoon rainbow in the East, and mind
my apples and pears for the present.

You are to know that in these days I lay out a patch of orchard
near my house, very much to the improvement, as all the household
affirm, of our homestead.  Though I have little skill in these
things, and must borrow that of my neighbors, yet the works of
the garden and orchard at this season are fascinating, and will
eat up days and weeks, and a brave scholar should shun it like
gambling, and take refuge in cities and hotels from these
pernicious enchantments.  For the present, I stay in the
new orchard.

Duyckinck, a literary man in New York, who advises Wiley and
Putnam in their publishing enterprises, wrote me lately, that
they had $600 for you, from _Cromwell._  So may it be.

Yours,
R.W.E.



CXXI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--....My time is nearly up today;  but I write a
word to acknowledge your last Letter (30 April), and various
other things.  For example, you must tell Mr. Thoreau (is that
the exact name? for I have lent away the printed pages) that his
Philadelphia Magazine with the _Lecture_ in two pieces was
faithfully delivered here, about a fortnight ago;  and carefully
read, as beseemed, with due entertainment and recognition.  A
vigorous Mr. Thoreau,--who has formed himself a good deal upon
one Emerson, but does not want abundant fire and stamina of his
own;--recognizes us, and various other things, in a most admiring
great-hearted manner;  for which, as for _part_ of the confused
voice from the jury bog (not yet summed into a verdict, nor
likely to be summed till Doomsday, nor needful to sum), the poor
prisoner at the bar may justly express himself thankful!  In
plain prose, I like Mr. Thoreau very well;  and hope yet to hear
good and better news of him:--only let him not "turn to
foolishness";  which seems to me to be terribly easy, at present,
both in New England and Old!  May the Lord deliver us all from
_Cant;_  may the Lord, whatever else he do or forbear, teach us
to look Facts honestly in the face, and to beware (with a kind of
shudder) of smearing _them_ over with our despicable and damnable
palaver, into irrecognizability, and so _falsifying_ the Lord's
own Gospels to his unhappy blockheads of children, all staggering
down to Gehenna and the everlasting Swine's-trough for _want_ of
Gospels.--O Heaven, it is the most accursed sin of man;  and done
everywhere, at present, on the streets and high places, at
noonday!  Very seriously I say, and pray as my chief orison, May
the Lord deliver us from it.--

About a week ago there came your neighbor Hoar;  a solid,
sensible, effectual-looking man, of whom I hope to see much more.
So soon as possible I got him under way for Oxford, where I
suppose he was, last week;--_both_ Universities was too much for
the limits of his time; so he preferred Oxford;--and now, this
very day, I think, he was to set out for the Continent;  not to
return till the beginning of July, when he promises to call here
again.  There was something really pleasant to me in this Mr.
Hoar:  and I had innumerable things to ask him about Concord,
concerning which topic we had hardly got a word said when our
first interview had to end.  I sincerely hope he will not fail to
keep his time in returning.

You do very well, my Friend, to plant orchards;  and fair fruit
shall they grow (if it please Heaven) for your grandchildren to
pluck;--a beautiful occupation for the son of man, in all
patriarchal and paternal times (which latter are patriarchal
too)!  But you are to understand withal that your coming hither
to lecture is taken as a settled point by all your friends here;
and for my share I do not reckon upon the smallest doubt about
the _essential_ fact of it, simply on some calculation and
adjustment about the circumstantials.  Of Ireland, who I surmise
is busy in the problem even now, you will hear by and by,
probably in more definite terms:  I did not see him again after
my first notice of him to you;  but there is no doubt concerning
his determinations (for all manner of reasons) to get you to
Lancashire, to England;--and in fact it is an adventure which I
think you ought to contemplate as _fixed,_--say for this year and
the beginning of next?  Ireland will help you to fix the dates;
and there is nothing else, I think, which should need fixing.--
Unquestionably you would get an immense quantity of food for
ideas, though perhaps not at all in the way you anticipate, in
looking about among us:  nay, if you even thought us _stupid,_
there is something in the godlike indifference with which London
will accept and sanction even that verdict,--something highly
instructive at least!  And in short, for the truth must be told,
London is properly your Mother City too,--verily you have about
as much to do with it, in spite of Polk and Q. Victory, as I had!
And you ought to come and look at it, beyond doubt;  and say to
this land, "Old Mother, how are you getting on at all?"  To which
the Mother will answer, "Thankee, young son, and you?"--in a way
useful to both parties!  That is truth.

Adieu, dear Emerson;  good be with you always.  Hoar gave me your
_American_ Poems:  thanks. _Vale et me ama._

T. Carlyle




CXXII. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Carlyle,--I have just got your friendliest letter of May 18,
with its varied news and new invitations.  Really you are a
dangerous correspondent with your solid and urgent ways of
speaking.  No affairs and no studies of mine, I fear, will be
able to make any head against these bribes.  Well, I will adorn
the brow of the coming months with this fine hope;  then if the
rich God at last refuses the jewel, no doubt he will give
something better--to both of us.  But thinking on this project
lately, I see one thing plainly, that I must not come to London
as a lecturer.  If the plan proceed, I will come and see you,--
thankful to Heaven for that mercy, should such a romance looking
reality come to pass,--I will come and see you and Jane Carlyle,
and will hear what you have to say.  You shall even show me, if
you will, such other men and women as will suffer themselves to
be seen and heard, asking for nothing again.  Then I will depart
in peace, as I came.

At Mr. Ireland's "Institutes," I will read lectures;  and
possibly in London too, if, when there, you looking with your
clear eyes shall say that it is desired by persons who ought to
be gratified.  But I wish such lecturing to be a mere
contingency, and nowise a settled purpose.  I had rather stay at
home, and forego the happiness of seeing you, and the excitement
of England, than to have the smallest pains taken to collect an
audience for me.  So now we will leave this egg in the desert for
the ostrich Time to hatch it or not.

It seems you are not tired of pale Americans, or will not own it.
You have sent our Country-Senator where he wanted to go, and to
the best hospitalities as we learn today directly from him.  I
cannot avoid sending you another of a different stamp.  Henry
Hedge is a recluse but Catholic scholar in our remote Bangor, who
reads German and smokes in his solitary study through nearly
eight months of snow in the year, and deals out, every Sunday,
his witty apothegms to the lumber-merchants and township-owners
of Penobscot River, who have actually grown intelligent
interpreters of his riddles by long hearkening after them.  They
have shown themselves very loving and generous lately, in making
a quite munificent provision for his traveling.  Hedge has a true
and mellow heart,... and I hope you will like him.

I have seen lately a Texan, ardent and vigorous, who assured me
that Carlyle's Writings were read with eagerness on the banks of
the Colorado.  There was more to tell, but it is too late.

Ever yours,
R.W. Emerson




CXXIII. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Carlyle,--In my old age I am coming to see you.  I have
written this day, in answer to sundry letters brought me by the
last steamer, from Mr. Ireland and Mr. Hudson of Leeds, that I
mean in good earnest to sail for Liverpool or for London about
the first of October;  and I am disposing my astonished
household--astonished at such a Somerset of the sedentary master
--with that view.

My brother William was here this week from New York, and will
come again to carry my mother home with him for the winter;  my
wife and children three are combining for and against me;  at all
events, I am to have my visit.  I pray you to cherish your good
nature, your mercy.  Let your wife cherish it,--that I may see, I
indolent, this incredible worker, whose toil has been long since
my pride and wonder,--that I may see him benign and unexacting,--
he shall not be at the crisis of some over-labor.  I shall not
stay but an hour.  What do I care for his fame?  Ah! how gladly I
hoped once to see Sterling as mediator and amalgam, when my turn
should come to see the Saxon gods at home:  Sterling, who had
certain American qualities in his genius;--and now you send me
his shade.  I found at Munroe's shop the effigy, which, he said,
Cunningham, whom I have not seen or heard from, had left there
for me;  a front face, and a profile, both--especially the first
--a very welcome satisfaction to my sad curiosity, the face very
national, certainly, but how thoughtful and how friendly!  What
more belongs to this print--whether you are editing his books, or
yourself drawing his lineaments--I know not.

I find my friends have laid out much work for me in Yorkshire and
Lancashire.  What part of it I shall do, I cannot yet tell.  As
soon as I know how to arrange my journey best, I shall write
you again.

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson



CXXIV. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Almost ever since your last Letter reached me, I
have been wandering over the country, enveloped either in a
restless whirl of locomotives, view-hunting, &c., or sunk in the
deepest torpor of total idleness and laziness, forgetting, and
striving to forget, that there was any world but that of dreams;
--and though at intervals the reproachful remembrance has arisen
sharply enough on me, that I ought, on all accounts high and low,
to have written you an answer, never till today have I been able
to take pen in hand, and actually begin that operation!  Such is
the naked fact.  My Wife is with me;  we leave no household
behind us but a servant;  the face of England, with its mad
electioneerings, vacant tourist dilettantings, with its shady
woods, green yellow harvest-fields and dingy mill-chimneys, so
new and old, so beautiful and ugly, every way so _abstruse_ and
_un_speakable, invites to silence;  the whole world, fruitful yet
disgusting to this human soul of mine, invites me to silence;  to
sleep, and dreams, and stagnant indifference, as if for the time
one had _got_ into the country of the Lotos-Eaters, and it made
no matter what became of anything and all things.  In good truth,
it is a wearied man, at least a dreadfully slothful and
slumberous man, eager for _sleep_ in any quantity, that now
addresses you!  Be thankful for a few half-dreaming words, till
we awake again.

As to your visit to us, there is but one thing to be said and
repeated:  That a prophet's chamber is ready for you in Chelsea,
and a brotherly and sisterly welcome, on whatever day at whatever
hour you arrive:  this, which is all of the Practical that I can
properly take charge of, is to be considered a given quantity
always.  With regard to Lecturing, &c., Ireland, with whom I
suppose you to be in correspondence, seems to have awakened all
this North Country into the fixed hope of hearing you,--and God
knows they have need enough to hear a man with sense in his
head;--it was but the other day I read in one of their
Newspapers, "We understand that Mr. Emerson the distinguished &c.
is certainly &c. this winter," all in due Newspaper phrase, and I
think they settled your arrival for "October" next.  May it prove
so!  But on the whole there _is_ no doubt of your coming;  that
is a great fact.  And if so, I should say, Why not come at once,
even as the Editor surmises?  You will evidently do no other
considerable enterprise till this voyage to England is achieved.
Come therefore;--and we shall see;  we shall hear and speak!  I
do not know another man in all the world to whom I can _speak_
with clear hope of getting adequate response from him:  if I
speak to you, it will be a breaking of my silence for the last
time perhaps,--perhaps for the first time, on some points!
_Allons._  I shall not always be so roadweary, lifeweary, sleepy,
and stony as at present.  I even think there is yet another Book
in me;  "Exodus from Houndsditch" (I think it might be called),
a peeling off of fetid _Jewhood_ in every sense from myself and
my poor bewildered brethren:  one other Book;  and, if it were a
right one, rest after that, the deeper the better, forevermore.
_Ach Gott!_--

Hedge is one of the sturdiest little fellows I have come across
for many a day.  A face like a rock;  a voice like a howitzer;
only his honest kind gray eyes reassure you a little.  We have
met only once;  but hope (mutually, I flatter myself) it may be
often by and by.  That hardy little fellow too, what has he to do
with "Semitic tradition" and the "dust-hole of extinct
Socinianism," George-Sandism, and the Twaddle of a thousand
Magazines?  Thor and his Hammer, even, seem to me a little more
respectable;  at least, "My dear Sir, endeavor to clear your mind
of Cant."  Oh, we are all sunk, much deeper than any of us
imagines.  And our worship of "beautiful sentiments," &c., &c. is
as contemptible a form of long-ears as any other, perhaps the
most so of any.  It is in fact damnable.--We will say no more of
it at present.  Hedge came to me with tall lank Chapman at his
side,--an innocent flail of a creature, with considerable impetus
in him:  the two when they stood up together looked like a circle
and tangent,--in more senses than one.

Jacobson, the Oxford Doctor, who welcomed your Concord Senator in
that City, writes to me that he has received (with blushes, &c.)
some grand "Gift for his Child" from that Traveler;  whom I am
accordingly to thank, and blush to,--Jacobson not knowing his
address at present.  The "address" of course is still more
unknown to _me_ at present:  but we shall know it, and the man it
indicates, I hope, again before long.  So, much for that.

And now, dear Emerson, Adieu.  Will your next Letter tell us the
_when?_  O my Friend!  We are here with Quakers, or Ex-Quakers
rather;  a very curious people, "like water from the crystal
well";  in a very curious country too, most beautiful and very
ugly:  but why write of it, or of anything more, while half
asleep and lotos-eating!  Adieu, my Friend;  come soon, and let
us meet again under this Sun.

Yours,
T. Carlyle



CXXV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--The last steamer brought, as ever, good tidings
from you, though certainly from a new habitat, at Leeds, or near
it.  If Leeds will only keep you a little in its precinct, I will
search for you there;  for it is one of the parishes in the
diocese which Mr. Ireland and his friends have carved out for me
on the map of England.

I have taken a berth in the packet-ship "Washington Irving,"
which leaves Boston for Liverpool next week, 5 October;  having
decided, after a little demurring and advising, to follow my
inclination in shunning the steamer.  The owners will almost take
oath that their ship cannot be out of a port twenty days.  At
Liverpool and Manchester I shall take advice of Ireland and his
officers of the "Institutes," and perhaps shall remain for some
time in that region, if my courage and my head are equal to the
work they offer me.  I will write you what befalls me in the
strange city.  Who knows but I may have adventures--I who had
never one, as I have just had occasion to write to Mrs. Howitt,
who inquired what mine were?

Well, if I survive Liverpool, and Manchester, and Leeds, or
rather my errands thither, I shall come some fine day to see you
in your burly city, you in the centre of the world, and sun me a
little in your British heart.  It seems a lively passage that I
am entering in the old Dream World, and perhaps the slumbers are
lighter and the Morning is near.  Softly, dear shadows, do not
scatter yet.  Knit your panorama close and well, till these rare
figures just before me draw near, and are greeted and known.

But there is no more time in this late night--and what need?
since I shall see you and yours soon.

Ever yours,
R.W.E.




CXXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Your Letter from Concord, of the 31st of July,
had arrived duly in London; been duly forwarded to my transient
address at Buxton in Derbyshire,--and there, by the faithless
Postmaster, _retained_ among his lumber, instead of given to me
when I called on him!  We staid in Buxton only one day and night;
two Newspapers, as I recollect, the Postmaster did deliver to me
on my demand;  but your Letter he, with scandalous carelessness,
kept back, and left me to travel forwards without:  there
accordingly it lay, week after week, for a month or more;  and
only by half-accident and the extraordinary diligence and
accuracy of our Chelsea Postman, was it recovered at all, not
many days ago, after my Wife's return hither.  Consider what kind
of fact this was and has been for us!  For now, if all have gone
right, you are approaching the coast of England;  Chelsea and
your fraternal House _hidden_ under a disastrous cloud to you;
and I know not so much as whitherward to write, and send you a
word of solution.  It is one of the most unpleasant mistakes that
ever befell me;  I have no resource but to enclose this Note to
Mr. Ireland, and charge him by the strongest adjurations to
have it ready for you the first thing when you set foot upon
our shores.

Know then, my Friend, that in verity your Home while in England
is _here;_  and all other places, whither work or amusement may
call you, are but inns and temporary lodgings.  I have returned
hither a day or two ago, and free from any urgent calls or
businesses of any kind;  my Wife has your room all ready;--and
here surely, if anywhere in the wide Earth, there ought to be a
brother's welcome and kind home waiting you!  Yes, by Allah!--An
"Express Train" leaves Liverpool every afternoon;  and in some
six hours will set you down here.  I know not what your
engagements are;  but I say to myself, Why not come at once, and
rest a little from your sea-changes, before going farther?  In
six hours you can be out of the unstable waters, and sitting in
your own room here.  You shall not be bothered with talk till you
repose;  and you shall have plenty of it, hot and hot, when the
appetite does arise in you.  "No. 5 Great Cheyne Row, Chelsea":
come to the "London Terminus," from any side;  say these magic
words to any Cabman, and by night or by day you are a welcome
apparition here,--foul befall us otherwise!  This is the fact:
what more can I say?  I make my affidavit of the same;  and
require you in the name of all Lares and Penates, and Household
Gods ancient and modern which are sacred to men, to consider it
and take brotherly account of it!--

Shall we hear of you, then, in a day or two:  shall we not
perhaps see you in a day or two!  That depends on the winds and
the chances;  but our affection is independent of such.  Adieu;
_au revoir,_ it now is!  Come soon;  come at once.

Ever yours,
T. Carlyle



CXXVII. Emerson to Carlyle

Ah! my dear friend, all these days have gone, and you have had no
word from me, when the shuttles fly so swiftly in your English
loom, and in so few hours we may have tidings of the best that
live.  At last, and only this day for the first day, I am
stablished in my own lodgings on English ground, and have a fair
parlor and chamber, into both of which the sun and moon shine,
into which friendly people have already entered.

Hitherto I have been the victim of trifles,--which is the fate
and the chief objection to traveling.  Days are absorbed in
precious nothings.  But now that I am in some sort a citizen, of
Manchester, and also of Liverpool (for there also I am to enter
on lodgings tomorrow, at 56 Stafford Street, Islington), perhaps
the social heart of this English world will include me also in
its strong and healthful circulations.  I get the best letters
from home by the last steamers, and was much occupied in
Liverpool yesterday in seeing Dr. Nichol of Glasgow, who was to
sail in the "Acadia," and in giving him credentials to some
Americans.  I find here a very kind reception from your friends,
as they emphatically are,--Ireland, Espinasse, Miss Jewsbury, Dr.
Hodgson, and a circle expanding on all sides outward,--and Mrs.
Paulet at Liverpool.  I am learning there also to know friendly
faces, and a certain Roscoe Club has complimented me with its
privileges.  The oddest part of my new position is my alarming
penny correspondence, which, what with welcomes, invitations to
lecture, proffers of hospitality, suggestions from good
Swedenborgists and others for my better guidance touching the
titles of my discourses, &c., &c., all requiring answers,
threaten to eat up a day like a cherry.  In this fog and
miscellany, and until the heavenly sun shall give me one beam,
will not you, friend and joy of so many years, send me a quiet
line or two now and then to say that you still smoke your pipe in
peace, side by side with wife and brother also well and smoking,
or able to smoke?  Now that I have in some measure calmed down
the astonishment and consternation of seeing your dreams change
into realities, I mean, at my next approximation or perihelion,
to behold you with the most serene and sceptical calmness.

So give my thanks and true affectionate remembrance to Jane
Carlyle, and my regards also to Dr. Carlyle, whose precise
address please also to send me.

Ever your loving
R.W.E.

The address at the top of this note is the best for the present,
as I mean to make this my centre.




CXXVIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Your Book-parcels were faithfully sent off,
directly after your departure:  in regard to one of them I had a
pleasant visit from the proprietor in person,--the young
Swedenborgian Doctor, whom to my surprise I found quite an
agreeable, accomplished secular young gentleman, much given to
"progress of the species," &c., &c.; from whom I suppose you have
yourself heard.  The wandering umbrella, still short of an owner,
hangs upon its peg here, without definite outlook.  Of yourself
there have come news, by your own Letter, and by various excerpts
from Manchester Newspapers.  _Gluck zu!_--

This Morning I received the Enclosed, and send it off to you
without farther response.  Mudie, if I mistake not, is some small
Bookseller in the Russell-Square region;  pray answer him, if you
think him worthy of answer.  A dim suspicion haunts me that
perhaps he was the Republisher (or Pirate) of your first set of
_Essays:_  but probably he regards this as a mere office of
untutored friendship on his part.  Or possibly I do the poor man
wrong by misremembrance?  Chapman could tell.

I am sunk deep here, in effete Manuscripts, in abstruse
meditations, in confusions old and new;  sinking, as I may
describe myself, through stratum after stratum of the Inane,--
down to one knows not what depth!  I unfortunately belong to
the Opposition Party in many points, and am in a minority of
one.  To keep silence, therefore, is among the principal duties
at present.

We had a call from Bancroft, the other evening.  A tough Yankee
man;  of many worthy qualities more tough than musical;  among
which it gratified me to find a certain small under-current of
genial _humor,_ or as it were _hidden laughter,_ not noticed
heretofore.

My Wife and all the rest of us are well;  and do all salute you
with our true wishes, and the hope to have you here again before
long.  Do not bother yourself with other than voluntary writing
to me, while there is so much otherwise that you are obliged to
write.  If on any point you want advice, information, or other
help that lies within the limits of my strength, command me, now
and always.  And so Good be with you;  and a happy meeting to us
soon again.

Yours ever truly,
T. Carlyle




CXXIX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Here is a word for you from Miss Fuller;  I send
you the Cover also, though I think there is little or nothing in
that.  It contained another little Note for Mazzini;  who is
wandering in foreign parts, on paths unknown to me at present.
Pray send my regards to Miss Fuller, when you write.

We hear of you pretty often, and of your successes with the
Northern populations.  We hope for you in London again before
long.--I am busy, if at all, altogether _inarticulately_ in these
days.  My respect for _silence,_ my distrust of _Speech,_ seem to
grow upon me.  There is a time for both, says Solomon;  but we,
in our poor generation, have forgotten one of the "times."

Here is a Mr. Forster of Rawdon, or Bradford, in Yorkshire;  our
late host in the Autumn time;  who expects and longs to be yours
when you come into those parts.

I am busy with William Conqueror's _Domesday Book_ and with the
commentaries of various blockheads on it:--Ah me!

All good be with you, and happy news from those dear to you.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CXXX. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Carlyle,--I am concerned to discover that Margaret Fuller in
the letter which you forwarded prays me to ask you and Mrs.
Carlyle respecting the Count and Countess Pepoli, who are in Rome
for the winter, whether they would be good for her to know?--That
is pretty nearly the form of her question.  As one third of the
winter is gone, and one half will be, before her question can be
answered, I fear, it will have lost some of its pertinence.
Well, it will serve as a token to pass between us, which will
please me if it do not Margaret.--I have had nothing to send you
tidings of.  Yet I get the best accounts from home of wife and
babes and friends.  I am seeing this England more thoroughly than
I had thought was possible to me.  I find this lecturing a key
which opens all doors.  I have received everywhere the kindest
hospitality from a great variety of persons.  I see many
intelligent and well-informed persons, and some fine geniuses.  I
have every day a better opinion of the English, who are a very
handsome and satisfactory race of men, and, in the point of
material performance, altogether incomparable.  I have made some
vain attempts to end my lectures, but must go on a little longer.
With kindest regards to the Lady Jane,

Your friend,
R.W.E.

Margaret Fuller's address, if anything is to be written, is, Care
of Maquay, Pakenham & Co., Rome.




CXXXI. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--We are very glad to see your handwriting again,
and learn that you are well, and doing well.  Our news of you
hitherto, from the dim Lecture-element, had been satisfactory
indeed, but vague.  Go on and prosper.

I do not much think Miss Fuller would do any great good with the
Pepolis,--even if they are still in Rome, and not at Bologna as
our advices here seemed to indicate.  Madam Pepoli is an elderly
Scotch lady, of excellent commonplace vernacular qualities,
hardly of more;  the Count, some years younger, and a much airier
man, is on all sides a beautiful _Dilettante,_--little suitable,
I fear, to the serious mind that can recognize him as such!
However, if the people are still in Rome, Miss Fuller can easily
try:  Bid Miss Fuller present my Wife's compliments, or mine, or
even _yours_ (for they know all our domesticities here, and are
very intimate, especially Madam with _My_ dame);  upon which the
acquaintance is at once made, and can be continued if useful.

This morning Richard Milnes writes to me for your address;  which
I have sent.  He is just returned out of Spain;  home swiftly to
"vote for the Jew Bill";  is doing hospitalities at Woburn Abbey;
and I suppose will be in Yorkshire (home, near Pontefract) before
long.  See him if you have opportunity:  a man very easy to _see_
and get into flowing talk with;  a man of much sharpness of
faculty, well tempered by several inches of "Christian _fat_" he
has upon his ribs for covering.  One of the idlest, cheeriest,
most gifted of fat little men.

Tennyson has been here for three weeks;  dining daily till he is
near dead;--setting out a Poem withal.  He came in to us on
Sunday evening last, and on the preceding Sunday:  a truly
interesting Son of Earth, and Son of Heaven,--who has almost lost
his way, among the will-o'-wisps, I doubt;  and may flounder ever
deeper, over neck and nose at last, among the quagmires that
abound!  I like him well;  but can do next to nothing for him.
Milnes, with general co-operation, got him a Pension;  and he has
bread and tobacco:  but that is a poor outfit for such a soul.
He wants a _task;_  and, alas, that of spinning rhymes, and
naming it "Art" and "high Art," in a Time like ours, will never
furnish him.

For myself I have been entirely _idle,_--I dare not even say, too
abstrusely _occupied;_  for I have merely been _looking_ at the
Chaos even, not by any means working in it.  I have not even read
a Book,--that I liked.  All "Literature" has grown inexpressibly
unsatisfactory to me.  Better be silent than talk farther in
this mood.

We are going off, on Saturday come a week, into Hampshire, to
certain Friends you have heard me speak of.  Our address, till
the beginning of February, is "Hon. W.B. Baring, Alverstoke,
Gosport, Hants."  My Wife sends you many kind regards;  remember
us across the Ocean too;--and be well and busy till we meet.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle

Last night there arrived No. 1 of the _Massachusetts Review:_
beautiful paper and print;  and very promising otherwise.  In the
Introduction I well recognized the hand;  in the first Article
too,--not in any of the others.  _Faustum sit._




CXXXII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I am here in Miss Martineau's house, and having
seen a good deal of England, and lately a good deal of Scotland
too, I am tomorrow to set forth again for Manchester, and
presently for London.  Yesterday, I saw Wordsworth for a good
hour and a half, which he did not seem to grudge, for he talked
freely and fast, and--bating his cramping Toryism and what
belongs to it--wisely enough.  He is in rude health, and, though
seventy-seven years old, says he does not feel his age in any
particular.  Miss Martineau is in excellent health and spirits,
though just now annoyed by the hesitations of Murray to publish
her book;  but she confides infinitely in her book, which is the
best fortune.  But I please myself not a little that I shall in a
few days see you again, and I will give you an account of my
journey.  I have heard almost nothing of your late weeks,--but
that is my fault,--only I heard with sorrow that your wife had
been ill, and could not go with you on your Christmas holidays.
Now may her good days have come again!  I say I have heard
nothing of your late days;  of your early days, of your genius,
of your influence, I cease not to hear and to see continually,
yea, often am called upon to resist the same with might and main.
But I will not pester you with it now.--Miss Martineau, who is
most happily placed here, and a model of housekeeping, sends
kindest remembrances to you both.

Yours ever,
R. W. Emerson.



CXXXIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--We are delighted to hear of you again at first
hand:  our last traditions represented you at Edinburgh, and left
the prospect of your return hither very vague.  I have only time
for one word tonight:  to say that your room is standing vacant
ever since you quitted it,--ready to be lighted up with all
manner of physical and moral _fires_ that the place will yield;
and is in fact _your_ room, and expects to be accounted such.--I
know not specially what your operations in this quarter are to
be;  but whatever they are, or the arrangements necessary for
them, surely it is here that you must alight again in the big
Babel, and deliberately adjust what farther is to be done.
Write to us what day you are to arrive;  and the rest is all
already managed.

Jane has never yet got out since the cold took her;  but she has
at no time been so ill as is frequent with her in these winter
disorders;  she is now steadily improving, and we expect will
come out with the sun and the green leaves,--as she usually does.
I too caught an ugly cold, and, what is very uncommon with me, a
kind of cough, while down in Hampshire;  which, with other
inarticulate matters, has kept me in a very mute abstruse
condition all this while;  so that, for many weeks past, I have
properly had no history,--except such as trees in winter, and
other merely passive objects may have.  That is not an agreeable
side of the page;  but I find it indissolubly attached to the
other:  no historical leaf with me but has them _both!_  Reading
does next to nothing for me at present, neither will thinking or
even dreaming rightly prosper;  of no province can I be quite
master except of the _silent_ one, in such a case.  One feels
there, at last, as if quite annihilated;  and takes up arms again
(the poor goose-quill is no great things of a weapon to arm
with!) as if in a kind of sacred despair.

All people are in a sort of joy-dom over the new French Republic,
which has descended suddenly (or shall we say, _ascended_ alas?)
out of the Immensities upon us;  showing once again that the
righteous Gods do yet live and reign!  It is long years since I
have felt any such deep-seated pious satisfaction at a public
event.  Adieu:  come soon;  and warn us when.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CXXXIV. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Friend,--I hope to set forward today for London, and to
arrive there some time tonight.  I am to go first to Chapman's
house, where I shall lodge for a time.  If it is too noisy, I
shall move westward.  But I hope you are to be at home tomorrow,
for if I prosper, I shall come and beg a dinner with you,--is it
not at five o'clock?  I am sorry you have no better news to tell
me of your health,--your own and your wife's.  Tell her I shall
surely report you to Alcott, who will have his revenge.  Thanks
that you keep the door so wide open for me still.  I shall always
come in.

Ever yours,
R.W.E.




CXXXV. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Carlyle,--Mrs. Crowe of Edinburgh, an excellent lady, known
to you and to many good people, wishes me to go to you with her.

I tell her that I believe you relax the reins of labor as early
as one hour after noon, and I propose one o'clock on Thursday for
the invasion.  If you are otherwise engaged, you must send me
word.  Otherwise, we shall come.

It was sad to hear no good news last evening from Jane Carlyle.
I heartily hope the night brought sleep, and the morning better
health to her.

Yours always,
R.W. Emerson




CXXXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--We shall be very glad to become acquainted with
Mrs. Crowe, of whom already by report we know many favorable
things.  Brown (of Portobello, Edinburgh) had given us intimation
of her kind purposes towards Chelsea;  and now on Thursday you
(please the Pigs) shall see the adventure achieved.  Two o'clock,
not one, is the hour when labor ceases here,--if, alas, there be
any "labor" so much as got begun;  which latter is often enough
the sad case.  But at either hour we shall be ready for you.

I hope you penetrated the Armida Palace, and did your devoir to
the sublime Duchess and her Luncheon yesterday!  I cannot without
a certain internal amusement (foreign enough to my present humor)
represent to myself such a conjunction of opposite stars!  But you
carry a new image off with you, and are a gainer, you.  _Allons._

My Papers here are in a state of distraction, state of despair!
I see not what is to become of them and me.

Yours ever truly,
T. Carlyle

My Wife arose without headache on Monday morning;  but feels
still a good deal beaten;--has not had "such a headache" for
several years.




CXXXVII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--I forgot to say, last night, that you are to dine
with us on Sunday;  that after our call on the Lady Harriet we
will take a stroll through the Park, look at the Sunday
population, and find ourselves here at five o'clock for the
above important object.  Pray remember, therefore, and no excuse!
In haste.

Yours ever truly,
T. Carlyle




CXXXVIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--We received your Letter duly, some time ago, with
many welcomes;  and have as you see been too remiss in answering
it.  Not from forgetfulness, if you will take my word;  no, but
from many causes, too complicated to articulate, and justly
producing an indisposition to put pen to paper at all!  Never was
I more silent than in these very months;  and, with reason too,
for the world at large, and my own share of it in small, are both
getting more and more unspeakable with any convenience!  In
health we of this household are about as well as usual;--and look
across to the woods of Concord with more light than we had,
realizing for ourselves a most mild and friendly picture there.
Perhaps it is quite as well that you are left alone of foreign
interference, even of a Letter from Chelsea, till you get your
huge bale of English reminiscences assorted a little.  Nobody
except me seems to have heard from you;  at least the rest, in
these parts, all plead destitution when I ask for news.  What you
saw and suffered and enjoyed here will, if you had once got it
properly warehoused, be new wealth to you for many years.  Of one
impression we fail not here:  admiration of your pacific virtues,
of gentle and noble tolerance, often sorely tried in this place!
Forgive me my ferocities;  you do not quite know what I suffer in
these latitudes, or perhaps it would be even easier for you.
Peace for me, in a Mother of Dead Dogs like this, there is not,
was not, will not be,--till the battle itself end;  which,
however, is a sure outlook, and daily growing a nearer one.

Nay, there is another practical question,--but it is from the
female side of the house to the female side,--and in fact
concerns Indian meal, upon which Mrs. Emerson, or you, or the
Miller of Concord (if he have any tincture of philosophy) are now
to instruct us!  The fact is, potatoes having vanished here, we
are again, with motives large and small, trying to learn the use
of Indian meal;  and indeed do eat it daily to meat at dinner,
though hitherto with considerable despair.  Question _first,_
therefore:  Is there by nature a _bitter_ final taste, which
makes the throat smart, and disheartens much the apprentice in
Indian meal;--or is it accidental, and to be avoided?  We surely
anticipate the latter answer;  but do not yet see how.  At first
we were taught the meal, all ground on your side of the water,
had got fusty, _raw;_  an effect we are well used to in oaten and
other meals but, last year, we had a bushel of it ground _here,_
and the bitter taste was there as before (with the addition of
much dirt and sand, our millstones I suppose being too soft);--
whereupon we incline to surmise that there is, perhaps, as in the
case of oats, some pellicle or hull that ought to be _rejected_
in making the meal?  Pray ask some philosophic Miller, if Mrs.
Emerson or you do not know;--and as a corollary this _second_
question:  What is the essential difference between _white_ (or
brown-gray-white) Indian Meal and _yellow_ (the kind we now have;
beautiful as new Guineas, but with an ineffaceable tastekin of
_soot_ in it)?--And question _third,_ which includes all:  How to
cook _mush_ rightly, at least without bitter?  _Long_-continued
boiling seems to help the bitterness, but does not cure it.  Let
some oracle speak!  I tell all people, our staff of life is in
the Mississippi Valley henceforth;--and one of the truest
benefactors were an American Minerva who could teach us to cook
this meal;  which our people at present (I included) are
unanimous in finding nigh uneatable, and loudly exclaimable
against!  Elihu Burritt had a string of recipes that went through
all newspapers three years ago;  but never sang there oracle of
longer ears than that,--totally destitute of practical
significance to any creature here!

And now enough of questioning.  Alas, alas, I have a quite other
batch of sad and saddest considerations,--on which I must not so
much as enter at present!  Death has been very busy in this
little circle of ours within these few days.  You remember
Charles Buller, to whom I brought you over that night at the
Barings' in Stanhope Street?  He died this day week, almost quite
unexpectedly;  a sore loss to all that knew him personally, and
his gladdening sunny presence in many circles here;  a sore loss
to the political people too, for he was far the cleverest of all
Whig men, and indeed the only genial soul one can remember in
that department of things.  We buried him yesterday;  and now
see what new thing has come.  Lord Ashburton, who had left his
mother well in Hampshire ten hours before, is summoned from poor
Buller's funeral by telegraph;  hurries back, finds his mother,
whom he loved much, already dead!  She was a Miss Bingham, I
think, from Pennsylvania, perhaps from Philadelphia itself.  You
saw her;  but the first sight by no means told one all or the
best worth that was in that good Lady.  We are quite bewildered
by our own regrets, and by the far painfuler sorrow of those
closely related to these sudden sorrows.  Of which let me be
silent for the present;--and indeed of all things else, for
_speech,_ inadequate mockery of one's poor meaning, is quite a
burden to me just now!

Neuberg comes hither sometimes;  a welcome, wise kind of man.
Poor little Espinasse still toils cheerily at the oar, and
various friends of yours are about us.  Brother John did send
through Chapman all the _Dante,_ which we calculate you have
received long ago:  he is now come to Town;  doing a Preface,
&c., which also will be sent to you, and just about publishing.--
Helps, who has been alarmingly ill, and touring on the Rhine
since we were his guests, writes to me yesterday from Hampshire
about sending you a new Book of his.  I instructed him How.

Adieu, dear Emerson;  do not forget us, or forget to think
as kindly as you can of us, while we continue in this
world together.

Yours ever affectionately,
T. Carlyle



CXXXIX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Here in Boston for the day, though in no fit
place for writing, you shall have, since the steamer goes
tomorrow, a hasty answer to at least one of your questions....

You tell me heavy news of your friends, and of those who were
friendly to me for your sake.  And I have found farther
particulars concerning them in the newspapers.  Buller I have
known by name ever since he was in America with Lord Durham, and
I well remember his face and figure at Mr. Baring's.  Even
England cannot spare an accomplished man.

Since I had your letter, and, I believe, by the same steamer,
your brother's _Dante,_ complete within and without, has come to
me, most welcome.  I heartily thank him.  'T is a most
workmanlike book, bearing every mark of honest value.  I thank
him for myself, and I thank him, in advance, for our people, who
are sure to learn their debt to him, in the coming months and
years.  I sent the book, after short examination, the same day,
to New York, to the Harpers, lest their edition should come out
without Prolegomena.  But they answered, the next day, that they
had already received directly the same matter;--yet have not up
to this time returned my book.  For the Indian corn,--I have been
to see Dr. Charles T. Jackson (my wife's brother, and our best
chemist, inventor of etherization), who tells me that the reason
your meal is bitter is, that all the corn sent to you from us is
kiln-dried here, usually at a heat of three hundred degrees,
which effectually kills the starch or diastase (?) which would
otherwise become sugar.  This drying is thought necessary to
prevent the corn from becoming musty in the contingency of a long
voyage.  He says, if it should go in the steamer, it would arrive
sound without previous drying.  I think I will try that
experiment, shortly on a box or a barrel of our Concord maize, as
Lidian Emerson confidently engages to send you accurate recipes
for johnny-cake, mush, and hominy.

Why did you not send me word of Clough's hexameter poem, which I
have now received and read with much joy.   But no, you will
never forgive him his metres.  He is a stout, solid, reliable man
and friend,--I knew well;  but this fine poem has taken me by
surprise.  I cannot find that your journals have yet discovered
its existence.  With kindest remembrances to Jane Carlyle, and
new thanks to John Carlyle, your friend,

R.W. Emerson




CXL. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--Today is American Postday;  and by every rule
and law,--even if all laws but those of Cocker were abolished
from this universe,--a word from me is due to you!  Twice I have
heard since I spoke last:  prompt response about the Philadelphia
Bill;  exact performance of your voluntary promise,--Indian Corn
itself is now here for a week past....

Still more interesting is the barrel of genuine Corn ears,--
Indian Cobs of edible grain, from the Barn of Emerson himself!
It came all safe and right, according to your charitable program;
without cost or trouble to us of any kind;  not without curious
interest and satisfaction!  The recipes contained in the
precedent letter, duly weighed by the competent jury of
housewives (at least by my own Wife and Lady Ashburton), were
judged to be of decided promise, reasonable-looking every one of
them;  and now that the stuff itself is come, I am happy to
assure you that it forms a new epoch for us all in the Maize
department:  we find the grain _sweet,_ among the sweetest, with
a touch even of the taste of _nuts_ in it, and profess with
contrition that properly we have never tasted Indian Corn before.
Millers of due faculty (with millstones of _iron_) being scarce
in the Cockney region, and even cooks liable to err, the
Ashburtons have on their resources undertaken the brunt of the
problem one of their own Surrey or Hampshire millers is to grind
the stuff, and their own cook, a Frenchman commander of a whole
squadron, is to undertake the dressing according to the rules.
Yesterday the Barrel went off to their country place in Surrey,--
a small Bag of select ears being retained here, for our own
private experimenting;--and so by and by we shall see what comes
of it.--I on my side have already drawn up a fit proclamation of
the excellences of this invaluable corn, and admonitions as to
the benighted state of English eaters in regard to it;--to appear
in _Fraser's Magazine,_ or I know not where, very soon.  It is
really a small contribution towards World-History, this small act
of yours and ours:  there is no doubt to me, now that I taste the
real grain, but all Europe will henceforth have to rely more and
more upon your Western Valleys and this article.  How beautiful
to think of lean tough Yankee settlers, tough as gutta-percha,
with most occult unsubduable fire in their belly, steering over
the Western Mountains, to annihilate the jungle, and bring bacon
and corn out of it for the Posterity of Adam!  The Pigs in about
a year eat up all the rattlesnakes for miles round:  a most
judicious function on the part of the Pigs.  Behind the Pigs
comes Jonathan with his all-conquering ploughshare,--glory to him
too!  Oh, if we were not a set of Cant-ridden blockheads, there
is no _Myth_ of Athene or Herakles equal to this _fact;_--which I
suppose _will_ find its real "Poets" some day or other;  when
once the Greek, Semitic, and multifarious other Cobwebs are swept
away a little!  Well, we must wait.--For the rest, if this
skillful Naturalist and you will make any more experiments on
Indian Corn for us, might I not ask that you would try for a
method of preserving _the meal_ in a sound state for us?
Oatmeal, which would spoil directly too, is preserved all year by
kiln-drying the grain before it is ground,--parching it till it
is almost _brown,_ sometimes the Scotch Highlanders, by intense
parching, can keep their oatmeal good for a series of years.  No
Miller here at present is likely to produce such beautiful meal
as some of the American specimens I have seen:--if possible, we
must learn to get the grain over in the shape of proper durable
meal.  At all events, let your Friend charitably make some
inquiry into the process of millerage, the possibilities of it
for meeting our case;--and send us the result some day, on a
separate bit of paper.  With which let us end, for the present.

Alas, I have yet written nothing;  am yet a long way off writing,
I fear!  Not for want of matter, perhaps, but for redundance of
it;  I feel as if I had the whole world to write yet, with the
day fast bending downwards on me, and did not know where to
begin,--in what manner to address the deep-sunk populations of
the Theban Land.  Any way my Life is very _grim,_ on these terms,
and is like to be;  God only knows what farther quantity of
braying in the mortar this foolish clay of mine may yet need!--
They are printing a third Edition of _Cromwell;_  that bothered
me for some weeks, but now I am over with that, and the Printer
wholly has it:  a sorrowful, not now or ever a joyful thing to
me, that.  The _stupor_ of my fellow blockheads, for Centuries
back, presses too heavy upon that,--as upon many things, O
Heavens!  People are about setting up some _Statue of Cromwell,_
at St. Ives, or elsewhere:  the King-Hudson Statue is never yet
set up;  and the King himself (as you may have heard) has been
_discovered_ swindling.  I advise all men not to erect a statue
for Cromwell just now.  Macaulay's _History_ is also out, running
through the fourth edition:  did I tell you last time that I had
read it,--with wonder and amazement?  Finally, it seems likely
Lord John Russell will shortly walk out (forever, it is hoped),
and Sir R. Peel come in;  to make what effort is in him towards
delivering us from the _pedant_ method of treating Ireland.  The
_beginning,_ as I think, of salvation (if he can prosper a
little) to England, and to all Europe as well.  For they will all
have to learn that man does need government, and that an able-
bodied starving beggar is and remains (whatever Exeter Hall may
say to it) a _Slave_ destitute of a _Master;_  of which facts
England, and convulsed Europe, are fallen foundly ignorant in
these bad ages, and will plunge ever deeper till they rediscover
the same.  Alas, alas, the Future for us is not to be made of
_butter,_ as the Platforms prophesy;  I think it will be harder
than steel for some ages!  No noble age was ever a soft one, nor
ever will or can be.--Your beautiful curious little discourse
(report of a discourse) about the English was sent me by Neuberg;
I thought it, in my private heart, one of the best words (for
_hidden_ genius lodged in it) I had ever heard;  so sent it to
the _Examiner,_ from which it went to the _Times_ and all the
other Papers:  an excellent sly little word.

Clough has gone to Italy;  I have seen him twice,--could not
manage his hexameters, though I like the man himself, and
hope much of him.  "Infidelity" has broken out in Oxford
itself,--immense emotion in certain quarters in consequence,
virulent outcries about a certain "Sterling Club," altogether
a secular society!

Adieu, dear Emerson;  I had much more to say, but there is no
room.  O, forgive me, forgive me all trespasses,--and love me
what you can!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CXLI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--By all laws of human computation, I owe you a
letter, and have owed, any time these seven weeks:  let me now
pay a little, and explain.  Your _second_ Barrel of Indian Corn
arrived also perfectly fresh, and of admirable taste and quality;
the very bag of new-ground meal was perfect;  and the "popped
corn" ditto, when it came to be discovered:  with the whole of
which admirable materials such order was taken as promised to
secure "the greatest happiness to the greatest number";  and due
silent thanks were tendered to the beneficence of the unwearied
Sender:--but all this, you shall observe, had to be done in the
thick of a universal packing and household bustle;  I just on the
wing for a "Tour in Ireland," my Wife too contemplating a run to
Scotland shortly after, there to meet me on my return.  All this
was seven good weeks ago:  I hoped somewhere in my Irish
wayfarings to fling you off a Letter;  but alas, I reckoned there
quite without my host (strict "host," called _Time_), finding
nowhere half a minute left to me;  and so now, having got home to
my Mother, not to see my Wife yet for some days, it is my
_earliest_ leisure, after all, that I employ in this purpose.  I
have been terribly knocked about too,--jolted in Irish cars,
bothered almost to madness with Irish balderdash, above all kept
on dreadfully short allowance of sleep;--so that now first, when
fairly down to rest, all aches and bruises begin to be fairly
sensible;  and my clearest feeling at this present is the
uncomfortable one, "that I am not Caliban, but a Cramp":
terribly cramped indeed, if I could tell you everything!

What the other results of this Irish Tour are to be for me I
cannot in the least specify.  For one thing, I seem to be farther
from _speech_ on any subject than ever:  such masses of chaotic
ruin everywhere fronted me, the general fruit of long-continued
universal falsity and folly;  and such mountains of delusion yet
possessing all hearts and tongues I could do little that was not
even _noxious,_ except _admire_ in silence the general
"Bankruptcy of Imposture" as one there finds and sees it come to
pass, and think with infinite sorrow of the tribulations, futile
wrestlings, tumults, and disasters which yet await that
unfortunate section of Adam's Posterity before any real
improvement can take place among them.  Alas, alas!  The Gospels
of Political Economy, of _Laissez-faire,_ No-Government, Paradise
to all comers, and so many fatal Gospels,--generally, one may
say, all the Gospels of this blessed "New Era,"--will first have
to be tried, and found wanting.  With a quantity of written and
uttered nonsense, and of suffered and inflicted misery, which one
sinks fairly dumb to estimate!  A kind of comfort it is, however,
to see that "Imposture" _has_ fallen openly "bankrupt," here as
everywhere else in our old world;  that no dexterity of human
tinkering, with all the Parliamentary Eloquence and Elective
Franchises in nature, will ever set it on its feet again, to go
many yards more;  but that _its_ goings and currencies in this
Earth have as good as ceased for ever and ever!  God is great;
all Lies do now, as from the first, travel incessantly towards
Chaos, and there at length lodge!  In some parts of Ireland (the
Western "insolvent Unions," some twenty-seven of them in all),
within a trifle of _one half_ of the whole population are on
Poor-Law rations (furnished by the British Government, L1,100 a
week furnished here, L1,300 there, L800 there); the houses stand
roofless, the lands unstocked, uncultivated, the landlords hidden
from bailiffs, living sometimes "on the hares of their domain":
such a state of things was never witnessed under this sky before;
and, one would humbly expect, cannot last long!--What is to be
done? asks every one;  incapable of _hearing_ any answer, were
there even one ready for imparting to him.  "_Blacklead_ these
two million idle beggars," I sometimes advised, "and sell them in
Brazil as Niggers,--perhaps Parliament, on sweet constraint, will
allow you to advance them to be Niggers!"  In fact, the
Emancipation Societies should send over a deputation or two to
look at _these_ immortal Irish "Freemen," the _ne plus ultra_ of
their class it would perhaps moderate the windpipe of much
eloquence one hears on that subject!  Is not this the most
illustrious of all "ages";  making progress of the species at a
grand rate indeed?  Peace be with it.

Waiting for me here, there was a Letter from Miss Fuller in Rome,
written about a month ago;  a dignified and interesting Letter;
requesting help with Booksellers for some "History of the late
Italian Revolution" she is about writing;  and elegiacally
recognizing the worth of Mazzini and other cognate persons and
things.  I instantly set about doing what little seemed in my
power towards this object,--with what result is yet hidden, and
have written to the heroic Margaret:  "More power to her elbow!"
as the Irish say.  She has a beautiful enthusiasm;  and is
perhaps in the right stage of insight for doing that piece of
business well.--Of other persons or interests I will say nothing
till a calmer opportunity;  which surely cannot be very long
in coming.

In four days I am to rejoin my wife;  after which some bits of
visits are to be paid in this North Country;  necessary most of
them, not likely to be profitable almost any.  In perhaps a month
I expect to be back in Chelsea;  whither direct a word if you are
still beneficent enough to think of such a Castaway!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle

I got Thoreau's Book;  and meant well to read it, but have not
yet succeeded, though it went with me through all Ireland:  tell
him so, please.  Too Jean-Paulish, I found it hitherto.




CXLII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson, My Friend, my Friend,--You behold before you a
remorseful man!  It is well-nigh a year now since I despatched
some hurried rag of paper to you out of Scotland, indicating
doubtless that I would speedily follow it with a longer letter;
and here, when gray Autumn is at hand again, I have still written
nothing to you, heard nothing from you!  It is miserable to think
of:--and yet it is a fact, and there is no denying of it;  and so
we must let it lie.  If it please Heaven, the like shall not
occur again.  "Ohone Arooh!" as the Irish taught me to say,
"Ohone Arooh!"

The fact is, my life has been black with care and toil,--labor
above board and far worse labor below;--I have hardly had a
heavier year (overloaded too with a kind of "health" which may be
called frightful):  to "burn my own smoke" in some measure, has
really been all I was up to;  and except on sheer immediate
compulsion I have not written a word to any creature.--
Yesternight  I finished the last of these extraordinary
_Pamphlets;_  am about running off somewhither into the deserts,
of Wales or Scotland, Scandinavia or still remoter deserts;--and
my first signal of revived reminiscence is to you.

Nay I have not at any time forgotten you, be that justice done
the unfortunate:  and though I see well enough what a great deep
cleft divides us, in our ways of practically looking at this
world,--I see also (as probably you do yourself) where the rock-
strata, miles deep, unite again;  and the two poor souls are at
one.  Poor devils!--Nay if there were no point of agreement at
all, and I were more intolerant "of ways of thinking" than I even
am,--yet has not the man Emerson, from old years, been a Human
Friend to me?  Can I ever forget, or think otherwise than
lovingly of the man Emerson?  No more of this.  Write to me in
your first good hour;  and say that there is still a brother-soul
left to me alive in this world, and a kind thought surviving far
over the sea!--Chapman, with due punctuality at the time of
publication, sent me the _Representative Men;_  which I read in
the becoming manner:  you now get the Book offered you for a
shilling, at all railway stations;  and indeed I perceive the
word "representative man"' (as applied to the late tragic loss we
have had in Sir Robert Peel) has been adopted by the Able-
Editors, and circulates through Newspapers as an appropriate
household word, which is some compensation to you for the piracy
you suffer from the Typographic Letter-of-marque men here.  I
found the Book a most finished clear and perfect set of
_Engravings in the line manner;_  portraitures full of
_likeness,_ and abounding in instruction and materials for
reflection to me:  thanks always for such a Book;  and Heaven
send us many more of them.  _Plato,_ I think, though it is the
most admired by many, did least for me:  little save Socrates
with his clogs and big ears remains alive with me from it.
_Swedenborg_ is excellent in _likeness;_  excellent in many
respects;--yet I said to myself, on reaching your general
conclusion about the man and his struggles:  "_Missed_ the
consummate flower and divine ultimate elixir of Philosophy, say
you?  By Heaven, in clutching at _it,_ and almost getting it, he
has tumbled into Bedlam,--which is a terrible _miss,_ if it were
never so _near!_  A miss fully as good as a mile, I should say!"
--In fact, I generally dissented a little about the _end_ of all
these Essays;  which was notable, and not without instructive
interest to me, as I had so lustily shouted "Hear, hear!" all the
way from the beginning up to that stage.--On the whole, let us
have another Book with your earliest convenience:  that is the
modest request one makes of you on shutting this.

I know not what I am now going to set about:  the horrible
barking of the universal dog-kennel (awakened by these
_Pamphlets_) must still itself again;  my poor nerves must
recover themselves a little:--I have much more to say;  and
by Heaven's blessing must try to get it said in some way if
I live.--

Bostonian Prescott is here, infinitely _lionized_ by a mob of
gentlemen;  I have seen him in two places or three (but forbore
speech):  the Johnny-cake is good, the twopence worth of currants
in it too are good;  but if you offer it as a bit of baked
Ambrosia, _Ach Gott!_--

Adieu, dear Emerson, forgive, and love me a little.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CXLIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--You are often enough present to my thoughts;  but
yesterday there came a little incident which has brought you
rather vividly upon the scene for me.  A certain "Mr. ---" from
Boston sends us, yesterday morning by post, a Note of yours
addressed to Mazzini, whom he cannot find;  and indicates that he
retains a similar one addressed to myself, and (in the most
courteous, kindly, and dignified manner, if Mercy prevent not) is
about carrying it off with him again to America!  To give Mercy a
chance, I by the first opportunity get under way for Morley's
Hotel, the address of Mr. ---;  find there that Mr.--, since
morning, _has been_ on the road towards Liverpool and America,
and that the function of Mercy is quite extinct in this instance!
My reflections as I wandered home again were none of the
pleasantest.  Of this Mr. --- I had heard some tradition, as of
an intelligent, accomplished, and superior man;  such a man's
acquaintance, of whatever complexion he be, is and was always a
precious thing to me, well worth acquiring where possible;  not
to say that any friend of yours, whatever his qualities
otherwise, carries with him an imperative key to all bolts and
locks of mine, real or imaginary.  In fact I felt punished;--and
who knows, if the case were seen into, whether I deserve it?
What "business" it was that deprived me of a call from Mr. ---,
or of the possibility of calling on him, I know very well,--and
---, the little dog, and others know!  But the fact in that
matter is very far different indeed from the superficial
semblance;  and I appeal to all the _gentlemen_ that are in
America for a candid interpretation of the same.  "Eighteen
million bores,"--good Heavens don't I know how many of that
species we also have;  and how with us, as with you, the
difference between them and the Eighteen thousand noble-men and
non-bores is immeasurable and inconceivable;  and how, with us as
with you, the _latter_ small company, sons of the Empyrean, will
have to fling the former huge one, sons of Mammon and Mud, into
some kind of chains again, reduce them to some kind of silence
again,--unless the old Mud-Demons are to rise and devour us all?
Truly it is so I construe it:  and if --- and the Eighteen
millions are well justified in their anger at me, and the
Eighteen thousand owe me thanks and new love.  That is my decided
opinion, in spite of you all!  And so, along with ---, probably
in the same ship with him, there shall go my protest against the
conduct of ---;  and the declaration that to the last I will
protest!  Which will wind up the matter (without any word of
yours on it) at this time.--For the rest, though --- sent me his
Pamphlet, it is a fact I have not read a word of it, nor shall
ever read.  My Wife read it;  but I was away, with far other
things in my head;  and it was "lent to various persons" till it
died!--Enough and ten times more than enough of all that.  Let me
on this last slip of paper give you some response to the Letter
I got in Scotland, under the silence of the bright autumn sun, in
my Mother's house, and read there.

You are bountiful abundantly in your reception of those _Latter
Day Pamphlets;_  and right in all you say of them;--and yet
withal you are not right, my Friend, but I am!  Truly it does
behove a man to know the inmost resources of this universe, and,
for the sake both of his peace and of his dignity, to possess his
soul in patience, and look nothing doubting (nothing wincing
even, if that be his humor) upon all things.  For it is most
indubitable there is good in all;--and if you even see an Oliver
Cromwell assassinated, it is certain you may get a cartload of
turnips from his carcass.  Ah me, and I suppose we had too much
forgotten all this, or there had not been a man like you sent to
show it us so emphatically!  Let us well remember it;  and yet
remember too that it is _not_ good always, or ever, to be "at
ease in Zion";  good often to be in fierce rage in Zion;  and
that the vile Pythons of this Mud-World do verily require to have
sun-arrows shot into them and red-hot pokers struck through them,
according to occasion:  woe to the man that carries either of
these weapons, and does not use it in their presence!  Here, at
this moment, a miserable Italian organ-grinder has struck up the
_Marseillaise_ under my window, for example:  was the
_Marseillaise_ fought out on a bed of down, or is it worth
nothing when fought?  On those wretched _Pamphlets_ I set no
value at all, or even less than none:  to me their one benefit
is, my own heart is clear of them (a benefit not to be despised,
I assure you!)--and in the Public, athwart this storm of curses,
and emptyings of vessels of dishonor, I can already perceive that
it is all well enough there too in reference to them;  and the
controversy of the Eighteen millions _versus_ the Eighteen
thousands, or Eighteen units, is going on very handsomely in that
quarter of it, for aught I can see!  And so, Peace to the brave
that are departed;  and, Tomorrow to fresh fields and pastures new!--

I was in Wales, as well as Scotland, during Autumn time;  lived
three weeks within wind of St. Germanus's old "College" (Fourteen
Hundred years of age or so) and also not far from _Merthyr
Tydvil,_ Cyclops' Hell, sootiest and horridest avatar of the
Industrial Mammon I had ever anywhere seen;  went through the
Severn Valley;  at Bath stayed a night with Landor (a proud and
high old man, who charged me with express remembrances for you);
saw Tennyson too, in Cumberland, with his new Wife;  and other
beautiful recommendable and 'questionable things;--and was
dreadfully tossed about, and torn almost to tatters by the
manifold brambles of my way:  and so at length am here, a much-
lamed man indeed!  Oh my Friend, have tolerance for me, have
sympathy with me;  you know not quite (I imagine) what a burden
mine is, or perhaps you would find this duty, which you always
do, a little easier done!  Be happy, be busy beside your still
waters, and think kindly of me there.  My nerves, health I call
them, are in a sad state of disorder:  alas, that is nine tenths
of all the battle in this world.  Courage, courage!--My Wife
sends salutations to you and yours.  Good be with you all always.

Your affectionate,
T. Carlyle




CXLIV. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Don't you still remember very well that there is
such a man?  I know you do, and will do.  But it is a ruinously
long while since we have heard a word from each other;--a state
of matters that ought immediately to _cease._  It was your turn,
I think, to write?  It was somebody's turn!  Nay I heard lately
you complained of bad eyes;  and were grown abstinent of writing.
Pray contradict me this.  I cannot do without some regard from
you while we are both here.  Spite of your many sins, you are
among the most human of all the beings I now know in the world;--
who are a very select set, and are growing ever more so, I can
inform you!

In late months, feeling greatly broken and without heart for
anything weighty, I have been upon a _Life of John Sterling;_
which will not be good for much, but will as usual gratify me by
taking itself off my hands:  it was one of the things I felt a
kind of obligation to do, and so am thankful to have done.  Here
is a patch of it lying by me, if you will look at a specimen.
There are four hundred or more pages (prophesies the Printer), a
good many _Letters_ and Excerpts in the latter portion of the
volume.  Already half printed, wholly written;  but not to come
out for a couple of months yet,--all trade being at a stand till
this sublime "Crystal Palace" go its ways again.--And now since
we are upon the business, I wish you would mention it to E.P.
Clark (is not that the name?) next time you go to Boston:  if
that friendly clear-eyed man have anything to say in reference to
it and American Booksellers, let him say and do;  he may have a
Copy for anybody in about a month:  if _he_ have nothing to say,
then let there be nothing anywhere said.  For, mark O
Philosopher, I expressly and with emphasis prohibit _you_ at this
stage of our history, and henceforth, unless I grow poor again.
Indeed, indeed, the commercial mandate of the thing (Nature's
little order on that behalf) being once fulfilled (by speaking to
Clark), I do not care a snuff of tobacco how it goes, and will
prefer, here as elsewhere, my night's rest to any amount of
superfluous money.

This summer, as you may conjecture, has been very noisy with us,
and productive of little,--the "Wind-dust-ry of all Nations"
involving everything in one inane tornado.  The very shopkeepers
complain that there is no trade.  Such a sanhedrim of windy fools
from all countries of the Globe were surely never gathered in one
city before.  But they will go their ways again, they surely
will!  One sits quiet in that faith;--nay, looks abroad with a
kind of pathetic grandfatherly feeling over this universal
Children's Ball which the British Nation in these extraordinary
circumstances is giving it self!  Silence above all, silence is
very behoveful!  I read lately a small old brown French
duodecimo, which I mean to send you by the first chance there is.
The writer is a Capitaine Bossu;  the production, a Journal of
his experiences in "La Louisiane," "Oyo" (_Ohio_), and those
regions, which looks very genuine, and has a strange interest to
me, like some fractional Odyssey or letter.  Only a hundred
years ago, and the Mississippi has changed as never valley did:
in 1751 older and stranger, looked at from its present date, than
Balbec or Nineveh!  Say what we will, Jonathan is doing miracles
(of a sort) under the sun in these times now passing.--Do you
know _Bartram's Travels?_  This is of the Seventies (1770) or so;
treats of _Florida_ chiefly, has a wondrous kind of floundering
eloquence in it;  and has also grown immeasurably _old._  All
American libraries ought to provide themselves with that kind of
book;  and keep them as a kind of future _biblical_ article.--
Finally on this head, can you tell me of any _good_ Book on
California?  Good:  I have read several bad.  But that too is
worthy of some wonder;  that too, like the Old Bucaniers, hungers
and thirsts (in ingenuous minds) to have some true record and
description given of it.

And poor Miss Fuller, was there any _Life_ ever published of her?
or is any competent hand engaged on it?  Poor Margaret, I often
remember her;  and think how she is asleep now under the surges
of the sea.  Mazzini, as you perhaps know, is with us this
summer;  comes across once in the week or so, and tells me, or at
least my Wife, all his news.  The Roman revolution has made a man
of him,--quite brightened up ever since;--and the best friend
_he_ ever saw, I believe, was that same Quack-President of
France, who relieved him while it was still time.

My Brother is in Annandale, working hard over _Dante_ at last;
talks of coming up hither shortly;  I am myself very ill and
miserable in the _liver_ regions;  very tough otherwise,--though
I have now got spectacles for small print in the twilight.  _Eheu
fugaces,_--and yet why _Eheu?_  In fact it is better to be
silent.--Adieu, dear Emerson;  I expect to get a great deal
brisker by and by,--and in the first place to have a Missive from
Boston again.  My Wife sends you many regards.  I am as ever,--
affectionately Yours,

T. Carlyle




CXLV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--You must always thank me for silence, be it
never so long, and must put on it the most generous
interpretations.  For I am too sure of your genius and goodness,
and too glad that they shine steadily for all, to importune you
to make assurance sure by a private beam very often.  There is
very little in this village to be said to you, and, with all my
love of your letters, I think it the kind part to defend you from
our imbecilities,--my own, and other men's.  Besides, my eyes are
bad, and prone to mutiny at any hint of white paper.

And yet I owe you all my story, if story I have.  I have been
something of a traveler the last year, and went down the Ohio
River to its mouth;  walked nine miles into, and nine miles out
of the Mammoth Cave, in Kentucky,--walked or sailed, for we
crossed small underground streams,--and lost one day's light;
then steamed up the Mississippi, five days, to Galena.  In the
Upper Mississippi, you are always in a lake with many islands.

"The Far West" is the right name for these verdant deserts.  On
all the shores, interminable silent forest.  If you land, there
is prairie behind prairie, forest behind forest, sites of
nations, no nations.  The raw bullion of nature;  what we call
"moral" value not yet stamped on it.  But in a thousand miles the
immense material values will show twenty or fifty Californias;
that a good ciphering head will make one where he is.  Thus at
Pittsburg, on the Ohio, the "Iron" City, whither, from want of
railroads, few Yankees have penetrated, every acre of land has
three or four bottoms;  first of rich soil;  then nine feet of
bituminous coal;  a little lower, fourteen feet of coal;  then
iron, or salt;  salt springs, with a valuable oil called
petroleum floating on their surface.  Yet this acre sells for the
price of any tillage acre in Massachusetts;  and, in a year, the
railroads will reach it, east and west.--I came home by the great
Northern Lakes and Niagara.

No books, a few lectures, each winter, I write and read.  In the
spring, the abomination of our Fugitive Slave Bill drove me to
some writing and speech-making, without hope of effect, but to
clear my own skirts.  I am sorry I did not print whilst it was
yet time.  I am now told that the time will come again, more's
the pity.  Now I am trying to make a sort of memoir of Margaret
Fuller, or my part in one;--for Channing and Ward are to do
theirs.  Without either beauty or genius, she had a certain
wealth and generosity of nature which have left a kind of claim
on our consciences to build her a cairn.  And this reminds me
that I am to write a note to Mazzini on this matter;  and, as you
say you see him, you must charge yourself with delivering it.
What we do must be ended by October.  You too are working for
Sterling.  It is right and kind.  I learned so much from the New
York _Tribune,_ and, a few days after, was on the point of
writing to you, provoked by a foolish paragraph which appeared in
Rufus Griswold's Journal, (New York,) purporting that R.W.E.
possessed important letters of Sterling, without which Thomas
Carlyle could not write the Life.  What scrap of hearsay about
contents of Sterling's letters to me, or that I had letters, this
paltry journalist swelled into this puff-ball, I know not.  He
once came to my house, and, since that time, may have known
Margaret Fuller in New York;  but probably never saw any letter
of Sterling's or heard the contents of any.  I have not read
again Sterling's letters, which I keep as good Lares in a special
niche, but I have no recollection of anything that would be
valuable to you.  For the American Public for the Book, I think
it important that you should take the precise step of sending
Phillips and Sampson the early copy, and at the earliest.  I saw
them, and also E.P. Clark, and put them in communication, and
Clark is to write you at once.

Having got so far in my writing to you, I do not know but I shall
gain heart, and write more letters over sea.  You will think my
sloth suicidal enough.  So many men as I learned to value in your
country,--so many as offered me opportunities of intercourse,--
and I lose them all by silence.  Arthur Helps is a chief
benefactor of mine.  I wrote him a letter by Ward,--who brought
the letter back.  I ought to thank John Carlyle, not only for me,
but for a multitude of good men and women here who read his
_Inferno_ duly.  W.E. Forster sent me his Penn Pamphlet;  I sent
it to Bancroft, who liked it well, only he thought Forster might
have made a still stronger case.  Clough I prize at a high rate,
the man and his poetry, but write not.  Wilkinson I thought a man
of prodigious talent, who somehow held it and so taught others to
hold it cheap, as we do one of those bushel-basket memories which
school-boys and school-girls often show,--and we stop their
mouths lest they be troublesome with their alarming profusion.
But there is no need of beginning to count the long catalogue.
Kindest, kindest remembrance to my benefactress, also in your
house, and health and strength and victory to you.

Your affectionate,
Waldo Emerson




CXLVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Many thanks for your Letter, which found me here
about a week ago, and gave a full solution to my bibliopolic
difficulties.  However sore your eyes, or however taciturn your
mood, there is no delay of writing when any service is to be done
by it!  In fact you are very good to me, and always were, in all
manner of ways;  for which I do, as I ought, thank the Upper
Powers and you.  That truly has been and is one of the
possessions of my life in this perverse epoch of the world....

I have sent off by John Chapman a Copy of the _Life of Sterling,_
which is all printed and ready, but is not to appear till the
first week of October....  Along with the _Sheets_ was a poor
little French Book for you,--Book of a poor Naval _Mississippi_
Frenchman, one "Bossu," I think;  written only a Century ago, yet
which already seemed old as the Pyramids in reference to those
strange fast-growing countries.  I read it as a kind of defaced
_romance;_  very thin and lean, but all _true,_ and very
marvelous as such.

It is above three weeks since my Wife and I left London, (the
Printer having done,) and came hither with the purpose of a month
of what is called "Water Cure";  for which this place, otherwise
extremely pleasant and wholesome, has become celebrated of late
years.  Dr. Gully, the pontiff of the business in our Island,
warmly encouraged my purpose so soon as he heard of it;  nay,
urgently offered at once that both of us should become his own
guests till the experiment were tried:  and here accordingly we
are;  I water-curing, assiduously walking on the sunny mountains,
drinking of the clear wells, not to speak of wet wrappages,
solitary sad _steepages,_ and other singular procedures;  my Wife
not meddling for her own behoof, but only seeing me do it.  These
have been three of the idlest weeks I ever spent, and there is
still one to come:  after which we go northward to Lancashire,
and across the Border where my good old Mother still expects me;
and so, after some little visiting and dawdling, hope to find
ourselves home again before September end, and the inexpressible
Glass Palace with its noisy inanity have taken itself quite away
again.  It was no increase of ill-health that drove me hither,
rather the reverse;  but I have long been minded to try this
thing:  and now I think the result will be,--_zero_ pretty
nearly, and one imagination the less.  My long walks, my
strenuous idleness, have certainly done me good;  nor has the
"water" done me any _ill,_ which perhaps is much to say of it.
For the rest, it is a strange quasi-monastic--godless and yet
_devotional_--way of life which human creatures have here, and
useful to them beyond doubt.  I foresee, this "Water Cure," under
better forms, will become the _Ramadhan_ of the overworked
unbelieving English in time coming;  an institution they were
dreadfully in want of, this long while!--We had Twisleton here
(often speaking of you), who is off to America again;  will sail,
I think, along with this Letter;  a semi-articulate but solid-
minded worthy man.  We have other officials and other
_litterateurs_ (T.B. Macaulay in his hired villa for one):  but
the mind rather shuns than seeks them, one finds solitary quasi-
devotion preferable, and [Greek], as Pindar had it!

Richard Milnes is married, about two weeks ago, and gone to
Vienna for a jaunt.  His wife, a Miss Crewe (Lord Crewe's
sister), about forty, pleasant, intelligent, and rather rich:
that is the end of Richard's long first act.   Alfred
Tennyson, perhaps you heard, is gone to Italy with his wife:
their baby died or was dead-born;  they found England wearisome:
Alfred has been taken up on the top of the wave, and a good deal
jumbled about since you were here.  Item Thackeray;  who is
coming over to lecture to you:  a mad world, my Masters!  Your
Letter to Mazzini was duly despatched;  and we hear from him that
he will write to you, on the subject required, without delay.
Browning and his wife, home from Florence, are both in London at
present;  mean to live in Paris henceforth for some time.  They
had seen something both of Margaret and her d'Ossoli, and
appeared to have a true and lively interest in them;  Browning
spoke a long while to me, with emphasis, on the subject:  I think
it was I that had introduced poor Margaret to them.  I said he
ought to send these reminiscences to America,--that was the night
before we left London, three weeks ago;  his answer gave me the
impression there had been some hindrance somewhere.  Accordingly,
when your Letter and Mazzini's reached me here, I wrote to
Browning urgently on the subject:  but he informs me that they
_have_ sent all their reminiscences, at the request of Mr. Story;
so that it is already all well.--Dear Emerson, you see I am at
the bottom of my paper.  I will write to you again before long;
we cannot let you lie fallow in that manner altogether.  Have you
got proper _spectacles_ for your eyes?   I have adopted that
beautiful symbol of old age, and feel myself very venerable:
take care of your eyes!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CXLVII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I have not grown so callous by my sulky habit,
but that I know where my friends are, and who can help me, in
time of need.  And I have to crave your good offices today, and
in a matter relating once more to Margaret Fuller....  You were
so kind as to interest yourself, many months ago, to set Mazzini
and Browning on writing their Reminiscences for us.  But we never
heard from either of them.  Lately I have learned, by way of Sam
Longfellow, in Paris, brother of our poet Longfellow, that
Browning assured him that he did write and send a memoir to this
country,--to whom, I know not.  It never arrived at the hands of
the Fullers, nor of Story, Channing, or me;--though the book was
delayed in the hope of such help.  I hate that his paper should
be lost.

The little French _Voyage,_ &c. of Bossu, I got safely, and
compared its pictures with my own, at the Mississippi, the
Illinois, and Chicago.  It is curious and true enough, no doubt,
though its Indians are rather dim and vague, and "Messieurs
Sauvages"  Good Indians we have in Alexander Henry's _Travels in
Canada,_ and in our modern Catlin, and the best Western America,
perhaps, in F.A. Michaux, _Voyage a l'ouest des monts
Alleghanis,_ and in Fremont.  But it was California I believe you
asked about, and, after looking at Taylor, Parkman, and the rest,
I saw that the only course is to read them all, and every private
letter that gets into the newspapers.  So there was nothing
to say.

I rejoiced with the rest of mankind in the _Life of Sterling,_
and now peace will be to his Manes, down in this lower sphere.
Yet I see well that I should have held to his opinion, in all
those conferences where you have so quietly assumed the palms.
It is said:  here, that you work upon Frederick the Great??
However that be, health, strength, love, joy, and victory to you.

R.W. Emerson




CXLVIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--I was delighted at the sight of your hand again.
My manifold sins against you, involuntary all of them I may well
say, are often enough present to my sad thoughts;  and a kind of
remorse is mixed with the other sorrow,--as if I could have
_helped_ growing to be, by aid of time and destiny, the grim
Ishmaelite I am, and so shocking your serenity by my ferocities!
I admit you were like an angel to me, and absorbed in the
beautifulest manner all thunder-clouds into the depths of your
immeasurable a ether;--and it is indubitable I love you very
well, and have long done, and mean to do.  And on the whole you
will have to rally yourself into some kind of Correspondence with
me again;  I believe you will find that also to be a commanded
duty by and by!  To me at any rate, I can say, it is a great
want, and adds perceptibly to the sternness of these years:  deep
as is my dissent from your Gymnosophist view of Heaven and Earth,
I find an agreement that swallows up all conceivable dissents;
in the whole world I hardly get, to my spoken human word, any
other word of response which is authentically _human._  God help
us, this is growing a very lonely place, this distracted dog-
kennel of a world!  And it is no joy to me to see it about to
have its throat cut for its immeasurable devilries;  that is not
a pleasant process to be concerned in either more or less,--
considering above all how many centuries, base and dismal all of
them, it is like to take!  Nevertheless _Marchons,_--and swift
too, if we have any speed, for the sun is sinking.... Poor
Margaret, that is a strange tragedy that history of hers;  and
has many traits of the Heroic in it, though it is wild as the
prophecy of a Sibyl.  Such a predetermination to _eat_ this big
Universe as her oyster or her egg, and to be absolute empress of
all height and glory in it that her heart could conceive, I have
not before seen in any human soul.  Her "mountain me" indeed:--
but her courage too is high and clear, her chivalrous nobleness
indeed is great;  her veracity, in its deepest sense, _a toute
epreuve._--Your Copy of the Book came to me at last (to my joy):
I had already read it;  there was considerable notice taken of it
here;  and one half-volume of it (and I grieve to say only one,
written by a man called Emerson) was completely approved by me
and innumerable judges.  The rest of the Book is not without
considerable geniality and merits;  but one wanted a clear
concise Narrative beyond all other merits;  and if you ask here
(except in that half-volume) about any fact, you are answered (so
to speak) not in words, but by a symbolic tune on the bagpipe,
symbolic burst of wind-music from the brass band;--which is not
the plan at all!--What can have become of Mazzini's Letter, which
he certainly did write and despatched to you, is not easily
conceivable.  Still less in the case of Browning:  for Browning
and his Wife did also write;  I myself in the end of last July,
having heard him talk kindly and well of poor Margaret and her
Husband, took the liberty on your behalf of asking him to put
something down on paper;  and he informed me, then and repeatedly
since, he had already done it,--at the request of Mrs. Story, I
think.  His address at present is, "No. 138 Avenue des Champs
Elysees, a Paris," if your American travelers still thought of
inquiring.--Adieu, dear Emerson, till next week.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CXLIX. Emerson to Carlyle

You make me happy with your loving thoughts and meanings towards
me.  I have always thanked the good star which made us early
neighbors, in some sort, in time and space.  And the beam is
twice warmed by your vigorous good-will, which has steadily kept
clear, kind eyes on me.

It is good to be born in good air and outlook, and not less with
a civilization, that is, with one poet still living in the world.
O yes, and I feel all the solemnity and vital cheer of the
benefit.--If only the mountains of water and of land and the
steeper mountains of blighted and apathized moods would permit a
word to pass now and then.  It is very fine for you to tax
yourself with all those incompatibilities.  I like that Thor
should make comets and thunder, as well as Iduna apples, or
Heimdal his rainbow bridge, and your wrath and satire has all too
much realism in it, than that we can flatter ourselves by
disposing of you as partial and heated.  Nor is it your fault
that you do a hero's work, nor do we love you less if we cannot
help you in it.  Pity me, O strong man!  I am of a puny
constitution half made up, and as I from childhood knew,--not a
poet but a lover of poetry, and poets, and merely serving as
writer, &c. in this empty America, before the arrival of the
poets.  You must not misconstrue my silences, but thank me
for them all, as a true homage to your diligence which I love
to defend...

She had such reverence and love for Landor that I do not know
but at any moment in her natural life she would have sunk in the
sea, for an ode from him;  and now this most propitious cake is
offered to her Manes.  The loss of the notes of Browning and of
Mazzini, which you confirm, astonishes me.




CL. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson...... You are a born _enthusiast,_ as quiet as you
are;  and it will continue so, at intervals, to the end.  I
admire your sly low-voiced sarcasm too;--in short, I love the
sternly-gentle close-buttoned man very well, as I have always
done, and intend to continue doing!--Pray observe therefore, and
lay it to heart as a practical fact, that you are bound to
persevere in writing to me from time to time;  and will never get
it given up, how sulky soever you grow, while we both remain in
this world.  Do not I very well understand all that you say about
"apathized moods," &c.?  The gloom of approaching old age
(approaching, nay arriving with some of us) is very considerable
upon a man;  and on the whole one contrives to take the very
ugliest view, now and then, of all beautifulest things;  and to
shut one's lips with a kind of grim defiance, a kind of imperial
sorrow which is almost like felicity,--so completely and
composedly wretched, one is equal to the very gods!  These too
are necessary, moods to a man.  But the Earth withal is verdant,
sun-beshone;  and the Son of Adam has his place on it, and his
tasks and recompenses in it, to the close;--as one remembers by
and by, too.  On the whole, I am infinitely solitary;  but not
more heavy laden than I have all along been, perhaps rather less
so;  I could fancy even old age to be beautiful, and to have a
real divineness:  for the rest, I say always, I cannot part with
you, however it go;  and so, in brief, you must get into the way
of holding yourself obliged as formerly to a kind of _dialogue_
with me;  and speak, on paper since not otherwise, the oftenest
you can.  Let that be a point settled.

I am not _writing_ on Frederic the Great;  nor at all practically
contemplating to do so.  But, being in a reading mood after those
furious _Pamphlets_ (which have procured me showers of abuse from
all the extensive genus Stupid in this country, and not done me
any other mischief, but perhaps good), and not being capable of
reading except in a train and _about_ some object of interest to
me,--I took to reading, near a year ago, about Frederick, as I
had twice in my life done before;  and have, in a loose way,
tumbled up an immense quantity of shot rubbish on that field, and
still continue.  Not with much decisive approach to Frederick's
_self,_ I am still afraid!  The man looks brilliant and noble to
me;  but how _love_ him, or the sad wreck he lived and worked in?
I do not even yet _see_ him clearly;  and to try making others
see him--?--Yet Voltaire and he _are_ the celestial element of
the poor Eighteenth Century;  poor souls.  I confess also to a
real love for Frederick's dumb followers:  the Prussian
_Soldiery._--I often say to myself, "Were not _here_ the real
priests and virtuous martyrs of that loud-babbling rotten
generation!"  And so it goes on;  when to end, or in what to end,
God knows.

Adieu, dear Emerson.  A blockhead (by mistake) has been let in,
and has consumed all my time.  Good be ever with you and yours.

T. Carlyle




CLI. Emerson to Carlyle

  My Dear Friend,--As I find I never write a letter except at the
dunning of the Penny Post,--which is the pest of the century,--I
have thought lately of crossing to England to excuse to you my
negligence of your injunction, which so flattered me by its
affectionateness a year ago.  I was to write once a month.  My
own disobedience is wonderful, and explains to me all the sins of
omission of the whole world.  The levity with which we can let
fall into disuse such a sacrament as the exchange of greeting at
short periods, is a kind of magnanimity, and should be an
astonishing argument of the "Immortality";  and I wonder how it
has escaped the notice of philosophers.  But what had I, dear
wise man, to tell you?  What, but that life was still tolerable;
still absurdly sweet;  still promising, promising, to credulous
idleness;--but step of mine taken in a true direction, or clear
solution of any the least secret,--none whatever.  I scribble
always a little,--much less than formerly,--and I did within a
year or eighteen months write a chapter on Fate, which--if we all
live long enough, that is, you, and I, and the chapter--I hope to
send you in fair print.  Comfort yourself--as you will--you will
survive the reading, and will be a sure proof that the nut is not
cracked.  For when we find out what Fate is, I suppose, the
Sphinx and we are done for;  and Sphinx, Oedipus, and world
ought, by good rights, to roll down the steep into the sea.

But I was going to say, my neglect of your request will show you
how little saliency is in my weeks and months.  They are hardly
distinguished in memory other than as a running web out of a
loom, a bright stripe for day, a dark stripe for night, and, when
it goes faster, even these run together into endless gray...  I
went lately to St. Louis and saw the Mississippi again.  The
powers of the River, the insatiate craving for nations of men to
reap and cure its harvests, the conditions it imposes,--for it
yields to no engineering,--are interesting enough.  The Prairie
exists to yield the greatest possible quantity of adipocere.  For
corn makes pig, pig is the export of all the land, and you shall
see the instant dependence of aristocracy and civility on the fat
four legs.  Workingmen, ability to do the work of the River,
abounded.  Nothing higher was to be thought of.  America is
incomplete.  Room for us all, since it has not ended, nor given
sign of ending, in bard or hero.  'T is a wild democracy, the
riot of mediocrities, and none of your selfish Italies and
Englands, where an age sublimates into a genius, and the whole
population is made into Paddies to feed his porcelain veins, by
transfusion from their brick arteries.  Our few fine persons are
apt to die.  Horatio Greenough, a sculptor, whose tongue was far
cunninger in talk than his chisel to carve, and who inspired
great hopes, died two months ago at forty-seven years.  Nature
has only so much vital force, and must dilute it, if it is to be
multiplied into millions.  "The beautiful is never plentiful."
On the whole, I say to myself, that our conditions in America are
not easier or less expensive than the European.  For the poor
scholar everywhere must be compromise or alternation, and, after
many remorses, the consoling himself that there has been
pecuniary honesty, and that things might have been worse.  But
no;  we must think much better things than these.  Let Lazarus
believe that Heaven does not corrupt into maggots, and that
heroes do not succumb.

Clough is here, and comes to spend a Sunday with me, now and
then.  He begins to have pupils, and, if his courage holds out,
will have as many as he wants.... I have written hundreds of
pages about England and America, and may send them to you
in print.  And now be good and write me once more, and I think
I will never cease to write again.  And give my homage to
Jane Carlyle.

Ever yours,
R.W. Emerson




CLII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--The sight of your handwriting was a real blessing
to me, after so long an abstinence.  You shall not know all the
sad reflections I have made upon your silence within the last
year.  I never doubted your fidelity of heart;  your genial deep
and friendly recognition of my bits of merits, and my bits of
sufferings, difficulties and obstructions;  your forgiveness of
my faults;  or in fact that you ever would forget me, or cease to
think kindly of me:  but it seemed as if practically _Old Age_
had come upon the scene here too;  and as if upon the whole one
must make up one's mind to know that all this likewise had fallen
silent, and could be possessed henceforth only on those new
terms.  Alas, there goes much over, year after year, into the
regions of the Immortals;  inexpressibly beautiful, but also
inexpressibly sad.  I have not many voices to commune with in the
world.  In fact I have properly no voice at all;  and yours, I
have often said, was the _unique_ among my fellow-creatures, from
which came full response, and discourse of reason:  the
_solitude_ one lives in, if one has any spiritual thought at all,
is very great in these epochs!--The truth is, moreover, I bought
spectacles to myself about two years ago (bad print in candle-
light having fairly become troublesome to me);  much may lie in
that!  "The buying of your first pair of spectacles," I said to
an old Scotch gentleman, "is an important epoch;  like the buying
of your first razor."--"Yes," answered he, "but not quite so
joyful perhaps!"--Well, well, I have heard from you again;  and
you promise to be again constant in writing.  Shall I believe
you, this time?  Do it, and shame the Devil!  I really am
persuaded it will do yourself good;  and to me I know right well,
and have always known, what it will do.  The gaunt lonesomeness
of this Midnight Hour, in the ugly universal _snoring_ hum of the
overfilled deep-sunk Posterity of Adam, renders an articulate
speaker precious indeed!  Watchman, what sayest thou, then?
Watchman, what of the night?--

Your glimpses of the huge unmanageable Mississippi, of the huge
ditto Model Republic, have here and there something of the _epic_
in them,--_ganz nach meinem Sinne._  I see you do not dissent
from me in regard to that latter enormous Phenomenon, except on
the outer surface, and in the way of peaceably instead of
_un_peaceably accepting the same.  Alas, all the world is a
"republic of the Mediocrities," and always was;--you may see what
_its_ "universal suffrage" is and has been, by looking into all
the ugly mud-ocean (with some old weathercocks atop) that now
_is:_  the world wholly (if we think of it) is the exact stamp of
men wholly, and of the _sincerest_ heart-tongue-and-hand
"suffrage" they could give about it, poor devils!--I was much
struck with Plato, last year, and his notions about Democracy:
mere Latter-Day Pamphlet _saxa et faces_ (read _faeces,_ if you
like) refined into empyrean radiance and lightning of the gods!--
I, for my own part, perceive the use of all this too, the
inevitability of all this;  but perceive it (at the present
height it has attained) to be disastrous withal, to be horrible
and even damnable.  That Judas Iscariot should come and slap
Jesus Christ on the shoulder in a familiar manner;  that all
heavenliest nobleness should be flung out into the muddy streets
there to jostle elbows with all thickest-skinned denizens of
chaos, and get itself at every turn trampled into the gutters and
annihilated:--alas, the _reverse_ of all this was, is, and ever
will be, the strenuous effort and most solemn heart-purpose of
every good citizen in every country of the world,--and will
_reappear_ conspicuously as such (in New England and in Old,
first of all, as I calculate), when once this malodorous
melancholy "Uncle Tommery" is got all well put by!  Which will
take some time yet, I think.--And so we will leave it.

I went to Germany last autumn;  not _seeking_ anything very
definite;  rather merely flying from certain troops of
carpenters, painters, bricklayers, &c., &c., who had made a
lodgment in this poor house;  and have not even yet got their
incalculable riot quite concluded.  Sorrow on them,--and no
return to these poor premises of mine till I have quite left!--In
Germany I found but little;  and suffered, from six weeks of
sleeplessness in German beds, &c., &c., a great deal.  Indeed I
seem to myself never yet to have quite recovered.  The Rhine
which I honestly ascended from Rotterdam to Frankfort was, as I
now find, my chief Conquest the beautifulest river in the Earth,
I do believe;  and my first idea of a World-river.  It is many
fathoms deep, broader twice over than the Thames here at high
water;  and rolls along, mirror-smooth (except that, in looking
close, you will find ten thousand little eddies in it),
voiceless, swift, with trim banks, through the heart of Europe,
and of the Middle Ages wedded to the Present Age:  such an image
of calm _power_ (to say nothing of its other properties) I find I
had never seen before.  The old Cities too are a little beautiful
to me, in spite of my state of nerves;  honest, kindly people
too, but sadly short of our and your _despatch-of-business_
talents,--a really painful defect in the long run.  I was on two
of Fritz's Battle-fields, moreover:  Lobositz in Bohemia, and
Kunersdorf by Frankfurt on the Oder;  but did not, especially in
the latter case, make much of that.  Schiller's death-chamber,
Goethe's sad Court-environment;  above all, Luther's little room
in the _Wartburg_ (I believe I actually had tears in my eyes
there, and kissed the old oak-table, being in a very flurried
state of nerves), my belief was that under the Canopy there was
not at present so _holy_ a spot as that same.  Of human souls I
found none specially beautiful to me at all, at all,--such my sad
fate!  Of learned professors, I saw little, and that little was
more than enough.  Tieck at Berlin, an old man, lame on a Sofa, I
did love, and do;  he is an exception, could I have seen much of
him.  But on the whole _Universal Puseyism_ seemed to me the
humor of German, especially of Berlin thinkers;--and I had some
quite portentous specimens of that kind,--unconscious specimens
of four hundred quack power!  Truly and really the Prussian
Soldiers, with their intelligent _silence,_ with the touches of
effective Spartanism I saw or fancied in them, were the class of
people that pleased me best.  But see, my sheet is out!  I am
still reading, reading, most nightmare Books about Fritz;  but as
to writing,--_Ach Gott!_  Never, never.--Clough is coming home, I
hope.--Write soon, if you be not enchanted!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CLIIa. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Your kindest letter, whose date I dare not
count back to,--perhaps it was May,--I have just read again, to
be deeply touched by its noble tragic tone of goodness to me, not
without new wonder at my perversity, and terror at what both may
be a-forging to strike me.  My slowness to write is a distemper
that reaches all my correspondence, and not that with you only,
though the circumstance is not worth stating, because, if I
ceased to write to all the rest, there would yet be good reason
for writing to you.  I believe the reason of this recusancy is
the fear of disgusting my friends, as with a book open always at
the same page.  For I have some experiences, that my interest in
thoughts--and to an end, perhaps, only of new thoughts and
thinking--outlasts that of all my reasonable neighbors, and
offends, no doubt, by unhealthy pertinacity.  But though rebuked
by a daily reduction to an absurd solitude, and by a score of
disappointments with intellectual people, and in the face of a
special hell provided for me in the Swedenborg Universe, I am yet
confirmed in my madness by the scope and satisfaction I find in a
conversation once or twice in five years, if so often;  and so we
find or pick what we call our proper path, though it be only from
stone to stone, or from island to island, in a very rude,
stilted, and violent fashion.  With such solitariness and
frigidities, you may judge I was glad to see Clough here, with
whom I had established some kind of robust working-friendship,
and who had some great permanent values for me.  Had he not taken
me by surprise and fled in a night, I should have done what I
could to block his way.  I am too sure he will not return.  The
first months comprise all the shocks of disappointment that are
likely to disgust a new-comer.  The sphere of opportunity opens
slowly, but to a man of his abilities and culture--rare enough
here--with the sureness of chemistry.  The Giraffe entering Paris
wore the label, "Eh bien, messieurs, il n'y a qu'une bete de
plus!"  And Oxonians are cheap in London;  but here, the eternal
economy of sending things where they are wanted makes a
commanding claim.  Do not suffer him to relapse into London.  He
had made himself already cordially welcome to many good people,
and would have soon made his own place.  He had just established
his valise at my house, and was to come--the gay deceiver--once a
fortnight for his Sunday;  and his individualities and his
nationalities are alike valuable to me.  I beseech you not to
commend his unheroic retreat.

I have lately made, one or two drafts on your goodness,--which I
hate to do, both because you meet them so generously, and because
you never give me an opportunity of revenge,--and mainly in the
case of Miss Bacon, who has a private history that entitles her
to high respect, and who could be helped only by facilitating her
Shakespeare studies, in which she has the faith and ardor of a
discoverer.  Bancroft was to have given her letters to Hallam,
but gave one to Sir H. Ellis.  Everett, I believe, gave her one
to Mr. Grote;  and when I told her what I remembered hearing of
Spedding, she was eager to see him;  which access I knew not how
to secure, except through you.  She wrote me that she prospers in
all things, and had just received at once a summons to meet
Spedding at your house.  But do not fancy that I send any one to
you heedlessly;  for I value your time at its rate to nations,
and refuse many more letters than I give.  I shall not send you
any more people without good reason.

Your visit to Germany will stand you in stead, when the
annoyances of the journey are forgotten, and, in spite of your
disclaimers, I am preparing to read your history of Frederic.
You are an inveterate European, and rightfully stand for your
polity and antiquities and culture:  and I have long since
forborne to importune you with America, as if it were a humorous
repetition of Johnson's visit to Scotland.  And yet since
Thackeray's adventure, I have often thought how you would bear
the pains and penalties;  and have painted out your march
triumphal.  I was at New York, lately, for a few days, and fell
into some traces of Thackeray, who has made a good mark in this
country by a certain manly blurting out of his opinion in various
companies, where so much honesty was rare and useful.  I am sorry
never once to have been in the same town with him whilst he was
here.  I hope to see him, if he comes again.  New York would
interest you, as I am told it did him;  you both less and more.
The "society" there is at least self-pleased, and its own;  it
has a contempt of Boston, and a very modest opinion of London.
There is already all the play and fury that belong to great
wealth.  A new fortune drops into the city every day;  no end is
to palaces, none to diamonds, none to dinners and suppers.  All
Spanish America discovers that only in the U. States, of all the
continent, is safe investment;  and money gravitates therefore to
New York.  The Southern naphtha, too, comes in as an ingredient,
and lubricates manners and tastes to that degree, that Boston is
hated for stiffness, and excellence in luxury is rapidly
attained.  Of course, dining, dancing, equipaging, etc. are the
exclusive beatitudes,--and Thackeray will not cure us of this
distemper.  Have you a physician that can?  Are you a physician,
and will you come?  If you will come, cities will go out to
meet you.

And now I see I have so much to say to you that I ought to write
once a month, and I must begin at this point again incontinently.


Ever yours,
R.W. Emerson




CLIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Your Letter came ten days ago;  very kind, and
however late, surely right welcome!  You ought to stir yourself
up a little, and actually begin to speak to me again.  If we are
getting old, that is no reason why we should fall silent, and
entirely abstruse to one another.  Alas, I do not find as I grow
older that the number of articulate-speaking human souls
increases around me, in proportion to the inarticulate and
palavering species!  I am often abundantly solitary in heart;
and regret the old days when we used to speak oftener together.

I have not quitted Town this year at all;  have resisted calls to
Scotland both of a gay and a sad description (for the Ashburtons
are gone to John of Groat's House, or the Scottish _Thule,_ to
rusticate and hunt;  and, alas, in poor old Annandale a tragedy
seems preparing for me, and the thing I have dreaded all my days
is perhaps now drawing nigh, ah me!)--I felt so utterly broken
and disgusted with the jangle of last year's locomotion, I judged
it would be better to sit obstinately still, and let my thoughts
_settle_ (into sediment and into clearness, as it might be);  and
so, in spite of great and peculiar noises moreover, here I am and
remain.  London is not a bad place at all in these months,--with
its long clean streets, green parks, and nobody in them, or
nobody one has ever seen before.  Out of La Trappe, which does
not suit a Protestant man, there is perhaps no place where one
can be so perfectly alone.  I might study even but, as I said,
there are noises going on;  a _last_ desperate spasmodic effort
of building,--a new top-story to the house, out of which is to be
made one "spacious room" (so they call it, though it is under
twenty feet square) where there shall be air _ad libitum,_ light
from the sky, and no _sound,_ not even that of the Cremorne
Cannons, shall find access to me any more!  Such is the prophecy;
may the gods grant it!  We shall see now in about a month;--then
adieu to mortar-tubs to all Eternity:--I endure the thing,
meanwhile, as well as I can;  might run to a certain rural
retreat near by, if I liked at any time;  but do not yet:  the
worst uproar here is but a trifle to that of German inns, and
horrible squeaking, choking railway trains;  and one does not go
to seek this, _this_ is here of its own will, and for a purpose!
Seriously, I had for twelve years had such a sound-proof
inaccessible apartment schemed out in my head;  and last year,
under a poor, helpless builder, had finally given it up:  but
Chelsea, as London generally, swelling out as if it were mad,
grows every year noisier;  a _good_ builder turned up, and with a
last paroxysm of enthusiasm I set him to.  My notion is, he will
succeed;  in which case, it will be a great possession to me for
the rest of my life.  Alas, this is not the kind of _silence_ I
could have coveted, and could once get,--with green fields and
clear skies to accompany it!  But one must take such as can be
had,--and thank the gods.  Even so, my friend.  In the course of
about a year of that garret sanctuary, I hope to have swept away
much litter from my existence:  in fact I am already, by dint of
mere obstinate quiescence in such circumstances as there are,
intrinsically growing fairly sounder in nerves.  What a business
a poor human being has with those nerves of his, with that crazy
clay tabernacle of his!  Enough, enough;  there will be all
Eternity to rest in, as Arnauld said:  "Why in such a fuss,
little sir?"

You "apologize" for sending people to me:  O you of little faith!
Never dream of such a thing nay, whom _did_ you send?  The
Cincinnati Lecturer I had provided for with Owen;  they would
have been glad to hear him, on the Cedar forests, on the pigs
making rattlesnakes into bacon, and the general adipocere
question, under any form, at the Albemarle Street rooms;--and he
never came to hand.  As for Miss Bacon, we find her, with her
modest shy dignity, with her solid character and strange
enterprise, a real acquisition;  and hope we shall now see more
of her, now that she has come nearer to us to lodge.  I have not
in my life seen anything so tragically _quixotic_ as her
Shakespeare enterprise:  alas, alas, there can be nothing but
sorrow, toil, and utter disappointment in it for her!  I do
cheerfully what I can;--which is far more than she _asks_ of me
(for I have not seen a prouder silent soul);--but there is not
the least possibility of truth in the notion she has taken up:
and the hope of ever proving it, or finding the least document
that countenances it, is equal to that of vanquishing the
windmills by stroke of lance.  I am often truly sorry about the
poor lady:  but she troubles nobody with her difficulties, with
her theories;  she must try the matter to the end, and charitable
souls must further her so far.

Clough is settled in his Office;  gets familiarized to it rapidly
(he says), and seems to be doing well.  I see little of him
hitherto;  I did not, and will not, try to influence him in his
choice of countries;  but I think he is now likely to continue
here, and here too he may do us some good.  Of America, at least
of New England, I can perceive he has brought away an altogether
kindly, almost filial impression,--especially of a certain man
who lives in that section of the Earth.  More power to his
elbow!--Thackeray has very rarely come athwart me since his
return:  he is a big fellow, soul and body;  of many gifts and
qualities (particularly in the Hogarth line, with a dash of
Sterne superadded), of enormous _appetite_ withal, and very
uncertain and chaotic in all points except his _outer breeding,_
which is fixed enough, and _perfect_ according to the modern
English style.  I rather dread explosions in his history.  A
_big,_ fierce, weeping, hungry man;  not a strong one.  _Ay de
mi!_  But I must end, I must end.  Your Letter awakened in me,
while reading it, one mad notion.  I said to myself:  Well, if I
live to finish this Frederic impossibility, or even to fling it
fairly into the fire, why should not I go, in my old days, and
see Concord, Yankeeland, and that man again, after all!--Adieu,
dear friend;  all good be with you and yours always.

T. Carlyle




CLIV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--The sight of Mr. Samuel Laurence, the day
before yesterday, in New York, and of your head among his
sketches, set me on thinking which had some pain where should be
only cheer.  For Mr. Laurence I hailed his arrival, on every
account.  I wish to see a good man whom you prize;  and I like to
have good Englishmen come to America, which, of all countries,
after their own, has the best claim to them.  He promises to come
and see me, and has begun most propitiously in New York.  For
you,--I have too much constitutional regard and ---, not to feel
remorse for my short-comings and slow-comings, and I remember the
maxim which the French stole from our Indians,--and it was worth
stealing,--"Let not the grass grow on the path of friendship."
Ah! my brave giant, you can never understand the silence and
forbearances of such as are not giants.  To those to whom we owe
affection, let us be dumb until we are strong, though we should
never be strong.  I hate mumped and measled lovers.  I hate cramp
in all men,--most in myself.

And yet I should have been pushed to write without Samuel
Laurence;  for I lately looked into _Jesuitism,_ a Latter-Day
Pamphlet, and found why you like those papers so well.  I think
you have cleared your skirts;  it is a pretty good minority of
one, enunciating with brilliant malice what shall be the
universal opinion of the next edition of mankind.  And the sanity
was so manifest, that I felt that the over-gods had cleared their
skirts also to this generation, in not leaving themselves without
witness, though without this single voice perhaps I should not
acquit them.  Also I pardon the world that reads the book as
though it read it not, when I see your inveterated humors.  It
required courage and required conditions that feuilletonists are
not the persons to name or qualify, this writing Rabelais in
1850.  And to do this alone.--You must even pitch your tune to
suit yourself.  We must let Arctic Navigators and deepsea divers
wear what astonishing coats, and eat what meats--wheat or whale--
they like, without criticism.

I read further, sidewise and backwards, in these pamphlets,
without exhausting them.  I have not ceased to think of the great
warm heart that sends them forth, and which I, with others,
sometimes tag with satire, and with not being warm enough for
this poor world;--I too,--though I know its meltings to-me-ward.
Then I learned that the newspapers had announced the death of
your mother (which I heard of casually on the Rock River,
Illinois), and that you and your brother John had been with her
in Scotland.  I remembered what you had once and again said of
her to me, and your apprehensions of the event which has come.  I
can well believe you were grieved.  The best son is not enough a
son.  My mother died in my house in November, who had lived with
me all my life, and kept her heart and mind clear, and her own,
until the end.  It is very necessary that we should have
mothers,--we that read and write,--to keep us from becoming
paper.  I had found that age did not make that she should die
without causing me pain.  In my journeying lately, when I think
of home the heart is taken out.

Miss Bacon wrote me in joyful fulness of the cordial kindness and
aid she had found at your hands, and at your wife's;  and I have
never thanked you, and much less acknowledged her copious
letter,--copious with desired details.  Clough, too, wrote about
you, and I have not written to him since his return to England.
You will see how total is my ossification.  Meantime I have
nothing to tell you that can explain this mild palsy.  I worked
for a time on my English Notes with a view of printing, but was
forced to leave them to go read some lectures in Philadelphia and
some Western towns.  I went out Northwest to great countries
which I had not visited before;  rode one day, fault of broken
railroads, in a sleigh, sixty-five miles through the snow, by
Lake Michigan, (seeing how prairies and oak-openings look in
winter,) to reach Milwaukee;  "the world there was done up in
large lots," as a settler told me.  The farmer, as he is now a
colonist and has drawn from his local necessities great doses of
energy, is interesting, and makes the heroic age for Wisconsin.
He lives on venison and quails. I was made much of, as the only
man of the pen within five hundred miles, and by rarity worth
more than venison and quails.

Greeley of the _New York Tribune_ is the right spiritual father
of all this region;  he prints and disperses one hundred and ten
thousand newspapers in one day,--multitudes of them in these very
parts.  He had preceded me, by a few days, and people had flocked
together, coming thirty and forty miles to hear him speak;  as
was right, for he does all their thinking and theory for them,
for two dollars a year.  Other than Colonists, I saw no man.
"There are no singing birds in the prairie,"  I truly heard.  All
the life of the land and water had distilled no thought.  Younger
and better, I had no doubt been tormented to read and speak their
sense for them.  Now I only gazed at them and their boundless land.

One good word closed your letter in September, which ought to
have had an instant reply, namely, that you might come westward
when Frederic was disposed of.  Speed Frederic, then, for all
reasons and for this!  America is growing furiously, town and
state;  new Kansas, new Nebraska looming up in these days,
vicious politicians seething a wretched destiny for them already
at Washington.  The politicians shall be sodden, the States
escape, please God!  The fight of slave and freeman drawing
nearer, the question is sharply, whether slavery or whether
freedom shall be abolished.  Come and see.  Wealth, which is
always interesting, for from wealth power refuses to be divorced,
is on a new scale.  Californian quartz mountains dumped down in
New York to be repiled architecturally along shore from Canada to
Cuba, and thence west to California again.  John Bull interests
you at home, and is all your subject.  Come and see the
Jonathanization of John.  What, you scorn all this?  Well, then,
come and see a few good people, impossible to be seen on any
other shore, who heartily and always greet you.  There is a very
serious welcome for you here.  And I too shall wake from sleep.
My wife entreats that an invitation shall go from her to you.

Faithfully yours,
R.W. Emerson




CLV. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--It was a morning not like any other which lay
round it, a morning to be marked white, that one, about a week
ago, when your Letter came to me;  a word from you yet again,
after so long a silence!  On the whole, I perceive you will not
utterly give up answering me, but will rouse yourself now and
then to a word of human brotherhood on my behalf, so long as we
both continue in this Planet.  And I declare, the Heavens will
reward you;  and as to me, I will be thankful for what I get, and
submissive to delays and to all things:  all things are good
compared with flat want in that respect.  It remains true, and
will remain, what I have often told you, that properly there is
no voice in this world which is completely human to me, which
fully understands all I say and with clear sympathy and sense
answers to me, but your voice only.  That is a curious fact, and
not quite a joyful one to me.  The solitude, the silence of my
poor soul, in the centre of this roaring whirlpool called
Universe, is great, always, and sometimes strange and almost
awful.  I have two million talking bipeds without feathers, close
at my elbow, too;  and of these it is often hard for me to say
whether the so-called "wise" or the almost professedly foolish
are the more inexpressibly unproductive to me.  "Silence,
Silence!"  I often say to myself:  "Be silent, thou poor fool;
and prepare for that Divine Silence which is now not far!"--On
the whole, write to me whenever you can;  and be not weary of
well-doing.

I have had sad things to do and see since I wrote to you:  the
loss of my dear and good old Mother, which could not be spared me
forever, has come more like a kind of total bankruptcy upon me
than might have been expected, considering her age and mine.  Oh
those last two days, that last Christmas Sunday!  She was a true,
pious, brave, and noble Mother to me;  and it is now all over;
and the Past has all become pale and sad and sacred;--and the
all-devouring potency of Death, what we call Death, has never
looked so strange, cruel and unspeakable to me.  Nay not _cruel_
altogether, let me say:  huge, profound, _unspeakable,_ that is
the word.--You too have lost your good old Mother, who stayed
with you like mine, clear to the last:  alas, alas, it is the
oldest Law of Nature;  and it comes on every one of us with a
strange originality, as if it had never happened before.--
Forward, however;  and no more lamenting;  no more than cannot be
helped.  "Paradise is under the shadow of our swords," said the
Emir:  "Forward!"--

I make no way in my Prussian History;  I bore and dig toilsomely
through the unutterablest mass of dead rubbish, which is not even
English, which is German and inhuman;  and hardly from ten tons
of learned inanity is there to be riddled one old rusty nail.
For I have been back as far as Pytheas who, first of speaking
creatures, beheld the Teutonic Countries;  and have questioned
all manner of extinct German shadows,--who answer nothing but
mumblings.  And on the whole Fritz himself is not sufficiently
divine to me, far from it;  and I am getting old, and heavy of
heart;--and in short, it oftenest seems to me I shall never write
any word about that matter;  and have again fairly got into the
element of the IMPOSSIBLE.  Very well:  could I help it?  I can
at least be honestly silent;   and "bear my indigence with
dignity," as you once said.  The insuperable difficulty of
_Frederic_ is, that he, the genuine little ray of Veritable and
Eternal that was in him, lay imbedded in the putrid Eighteenth
Century, such an Ocean of sordid nothingness, shams, and
scandalous hypocrisies, as never weltered in the world before;
and that in everything I can find yet written or recorded of him,
he still, to all intents and purposes, most tragically _lies_
THERE;--and ought not to lie there, if any use is ever to be had
of him, or at least of _writing_ about him;  for as to him, he
with his work is safe enough to us, far elsewhere.--Pity me, pity
me;  I know not on what hand to turn;  and have such a Chaos
filling all my Earth and Heaven as was seldom seen in British or
Foreign Literature!  Add to which, the Sacred Entity, Literature
itself, is not growing more venerable to me, but less and ever
less:  good Heavens, I feel often as if there were no madder set
of bladders tumbling on the billows of the general Bedlam at this
moment than even the Literary ones,--dear at twopence a gross, I
should say, unless one could _annihilate_ them by purchase on
those easy terms!  But do not tell this in Gath;  let it be a sad
family secret.

I smile, with a kind of grave joy, over your American
speculations, and wild dashing portraitures of things as they are
with you;  and recognize well, under your light caricature, the
outlines of a right true picture, which has often made me sad and
grim in late years.  Yes, I consider that the "Battle of Freedom
and Slavery" is very far from ended;  and that the fate of poor
"Freedom" in the quarrel is very questionable indeed!  Alas,
there is but one _Slavery,_ as I wrote somewhere;  and that, I
think, is mounting towards a height, which may bring strokes to
bear upon it again!  Meanwhile, patience;  for us there is
nothing else appointed.--Tell me, however, what has become of
your Book on England?  We shall really be obliged to you for
that.  A piece of it went through all the Newspapers, some years
ago;  which was really unique for its quaint kindly insight,
humor, and other qualities;  like an etching by Hollar or Durer,
amid the continents of vile smearing which are called "pictures" at
present.  Come on, Come on;  give us the Book, and don't loiter!--

Miss Bacon has fled away to _St. Alban's_ (the _Great_ Bacon's
place) five or six months ago;  and is there working out her
Shakespeare Problem, from the depths of her own mind, disdainful
apparently, or desperate and careless, of all _evidence_ from
Museums or Archives;  I have not had an answer from her since
before Christmas, and have now lost her address.  Poor Lady:  I
sometimes silently wish she were safe home again;  for truly
there can no madder enterprise than her present one be well
figured.  Adieu, my Friend;  I must stop short here.  Write soon,
if you have any charity.  Good be with you ever.

T. Carlyle




CLVI. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--On this delicious spring day, I will obey the
beautiful voices of the winds, long disobeyed, and address you;
nor cloud the hour by looking at the letters in my drawer to know
if a twelvemonth has been allowed to elapse since this tardy
writing was due.  Mr. Everett sent me one day a letter he had
received from you, containing a kind message to me, which gave me
pleasure and pain.  I returned the letter with thanks, and with
promises I would sin no more.  Instantly, I was whisked, by "the
stormy wing of Fate," out of my chain, and whirled, like a dry
leaf, through the State of New York.

Now at home again, I read English Newspapers, with all the world,
and claim an imaginary privilege over my compatriots, that I
revolve therein my friend's large part.  Ward said to me
yesterday, that Carlyle's star was daily rising.  For C. had said
years ago, when all men thought him mad, that which the rest of
mortals, including the Times Newspaper, have at last got near
enough to see with eyes, and therefore to believe.  And one day,
in Philadelphia, you should have heard the wise young Philip
Randolph defend you against objections of mine.  But when I have
such testimony, I say to myself, the high-seeing austerely
exigent friend whom I elected, and who elected me, twenty years
and more ago, finds me heavy and silent, when all the world
elects and loves him.  Yet I have not changed.  I have the same
pride in his genius, the same sympathy with the Genius that
governs his, the old love with the old limitations, though love
and limitation be all untold.  And I see well what a piece of
Providence he is, how material he is to the times, which must
always have a solo Soprano to balance the roar of the Orchestra.
The solo sings the theme;  the orchestra roars antagonistically
but follows.--And have I not put him into my Chapter of "English
Spiritual Tendencies," with all thankfulness to the Eternal
Creator,--though the chapter lie unborn in a trunk?

'T is fine for us to excuse ourselves, and patch with promises.
We shall do as before, and science is a fatalist.  I follow, I
find, the fortunes of my Country, in my privatest ways.  An
American is pioneer and man of all work, and reads up his
newspaper on Saturday night, as farmers and foresters do.  We
admire the [Greek], and mean to give our boys the grand habit;
but we only sketch what they may do.  No leisure except for the
strong, the nimble have none.--I ought to tell you what I do, or
I ought to have to tell you what I have done.  But what can I?
the same concession to the levity of the times, the noise of
America comes again.  I have even run on wrong topics for my
parsimonious Muse, and waste my time from my true studies.
England I see as a roaring volcano of Fate, which threatens to
roast or smother the poor literary Plinys that come too near for
mere purpose of reporting.

I have even fancied you did me a harm by the valued gift of
Antony Wood;--which, and the like of which, I take a lotophagous
pleasure in eating.  Yet this is measuring after appearance,
measuring on hours and days;  the true measure is quite other,
for life takes its color and quality not from the days, but the
dawns.  The lucid intervals are like drowning men's moments,
equivalent to the foregoing years.  Besides, Nature uses us.  We
live but little for ourselves, a good deal for our children, and
strangers.  Each man is one more lump of clay to hold the world
together.  It is in the power of the Spirit meantime to make him
rich reprisals,--which he confides will somewhere be done.--Ah,
my friend, you have better things to send me word of, than
these musings of indolence.  Is Frederic recreated?  Is Frederic
the Great?

Forget my short-comings and write to me.  Miss Bacon sends me
word, again and again, of your goodness.  Against hope and sight
she must be making a remarkable book.  I have a letter from her,
a few days ago, written in perfect assurance of success!  Kindest
remembrances to your wife and to your brother.

Yours faithfully,
R.W. Emerson




CLVII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Last Sunday, Clough was here;  and we were
speaking about you, (much to your discredit, you need not doubt,)
and how stingy in the way of Letters you were grown;  when, next
morning, your Letter itself made its appearance.  Thanks, thanks.
You know not in the least, I perceive, nor can be made to
understand at all, how indispensable your Letters are to me.  How
you are, and have for a long time been, the one of all the sons
of Adam who, I felt, completely understood what I was saying;
and answered with a truly _human_ voice,--inexpressibly
consolatory to a poor man, in his lonesome pilgrimage, towards
the evening of the day!  So many voices are not human;  but more
or less bovine, porcine, canine;  and one's soul dies away in
sorrow in the sound of them, and is reduced to a dialogue with
the "Silences," which is of a very abstruse nature!--Well,
whether you write to me or not, I reserve to myself the privilege
of writing to you, so long as we both continue in this world!  As
the beneficent Presences vanish from me, one after the other,
those that remain are the more precious, and I will not part with
them, not with the chief of them, beyond all.

This last year has been a grimmer lonelier one with me than any I
can recollect for a long time.  I did not go to the Country at
all in summer or winter;  refused even my Christmas at The Grange
with the Ashburtons,--it was too sad an anniversary for me;--I
have sat here in my garret, wriggling and wrestling on the worst
terms with a Task that I cannot do, that generally seems to me
not worth doing, and yet _must_ be _done._  These are truly the
terms.  I never had such a business in my life before.  Frederick
himself is a pretty little man to me, veracious, courageous,
invincible in his small sphere;  but he does not rise into the
empyrean regions, or kindle my heart round him at all;  and his
history, upon which there are wagon-loads of dull bad books, is
the most dislocated, unmanageably incoherent, altogether dusty,
barren and beggarly production of the modern Muses as given
hitherto.  No man of _genius_ ever saw him with eyes, except
twice Mirabeau, for half an hour each time.  And the wretched
Books have no _indexes,_ no precision of detail;  and I am far
away from Berlin and the seat of information;--and, in brief,
shall be beaten miserably with this unwise enterprise in my old
days;  _and_ (in fine) will consent to be so, and get through it
if I can before I die.  This of obstinacy is the one quality I
still show;  all my other qualities (hope, among them) often seem
to have pretty much taken leave of me;  but it is necessary to
hold by this last.  Pray for me;  I will complain no more at
present.  General Washington gained the freedom of America--
chiefly by this respectable quality I talk of;  nor can a history
of Frederick be written, in Chelsea in the year 1855, except as
_against_ hope, and by planting yourself upon it in an extremely
dogged manner.

We are all wool-gathering here, with wide eyes and astonished
minds, at a singular rate, since you heard last from me!
"Balaklava," I can perceive, is likely to be a substantive in the
English language henceforth:  it in truth expresses compendiously
what an earnest mind will experience everywhere in English life;
if his soul rise at all above cotton and scrip, a man has to
pronounce it all a _Balaklava_ these many years.  A Balaklava now
_yielding,_ under the pressure of rains and unexpected transit of
heavy wagons;  champing itself down into mere mud-gulfs,--towards
the bottomless Pool, if some flooring be not found.  To me it is
not intrinsically a new phenomenon, only an extremely hideous
one.  _Altum Silentium,_ what else can I reply to it at present?
The Turk War, undertaken under pressure of the mere mobility,
seemed to me an enterprise worthy of Bedlam from the first;  and
this method of carrying it on, _without_ any general, or with a
mere sash and cocked-hat for one, is of the same block of stuff.
_Ach Gott!_  Is not Anarchy, and parliamentary eloquence instead
of work, continued for half a century everywhere, a beautiful
piece of business?  We are in alliance with Louis Napoleon (a
gentleman who has shown only _housebreaker_ qualities hitherto,
and is required now to show heroic ones, _or_ go to the Devil);
and under Marechal Saint-Arnaud (who was once a dancing-master in
this city, and continued a _thief_ in all cities), a Commander of
the Playactor-Pirate description, resembling a _General_ as
Alexander Dumas does Dante Alighieri,--we have got into a very
strange problem indeed!--But there is something almost grand in
the stubborn thickside patience and persistence of this English
People;  and I do not question but they will work themselves
through in one fashion or another;  nay probably, get a great
deal of benefit out of this astonishing slap on the nose to their
self-complacency before all the world.  They have not _done_ yet,
I calculate, by any manner of means:  they are, however,
admonished in an ignominious and convincing manner, amid the
laughter of nations, that they are altogether on the wrong road
this great while (two hundred years, as I have been calculating
often),--and I shudder to think of the plunging and struggle they
will have to get into the approximately right one again.  Pray
for them also, poor stupid overfed heavy-laden souls!--Before my
paper quite end, I must in my own name, and that of a select
company of others, inquire rigorously of R.W.E. why he does not
_give_ us that little Book on England he has promised so long?  I
am very serious in saying, I myself want much to see it;--and
that I can see no reason why we all should not, without delay.
Bring it out, I say, and print it, _tale quale._  You will never
get it in the least like what _you_ wish it, clearly no!  But I
venture to warrant, it is good enough,--far too good for the
readers that are to get it.  Such a pack of blockheads, and
disloyal and bewildered unfortunates who know not their right
hand from their left, as fill me with astonishment, and are more
and more forfeiting all respect from me.  Publish the Book, I
say;  let us have it and so have done!  Adieu, my dear friend,
for this time.  I had a thousand things more to write, but have
wasted my sheet, and must end.  I will take another before long,
whatever you do.  In my lonely thoughts you are never long
absent:  _Valete_ all of you at Concord!

T. Carlyle




CLVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Carlyle,--There is no escape from the forces of time and
life, and we do not write letters to the gods or to our friends,
but only to attorneys, landlords, and tenants.  But the planes
and platforms on which all stand remain the same, and we are ever
expecting the descent of the heavens, which is to put us into
familiarity with the first named.  When I ceased to write to you
for a long time, I said to myself,--If anything really good
should happen here,--any stroke of good sense or virtue in our
politics, or of great sense in a book,--I will send it on the
instant to the formidable man;  but I will not repeat to him
every month, that there are no news.  Thank me for my resolution,
and for keeping it through the long night.--One book, last
summer, came out in New York, a nondescript monster which yet had
terrible eyes and buffalo strength, and was indisputably
American,--which I thought to send you;  but the book throve so
badly with the few to whom I showed it, and wanted good morals so
much, that I never did.  Yet I believe now again, I shall.  It is
called _Leaves of Grass,_--was written and printed by a
journeyman printer in Brooklyn, New York, named Walter Whitman;
and after you have looked into it, if you think, as you may, that
it is only an auctioneer's inventory of a warehouse, you can
light your pipe with it.

By tomorrow's steamer goes Mrs. --- to Liverpool, and to
Switzerland and Germany, by the advice of physicians, and I
cannot let her go without praying you to drop your pen, and shut
up German history for an hour, and extend your walk to her
chambers, wherever they may be.  _There's_ a piece of
republicanism for you to see and hear!  That person was, ten or
fifteen years ago, the loveliest of women, and her speech and
manners may still give you some report of the same.  She has
always lived with good people, and in her position is a centre of
what is called good society, wherein her large heart makes a
certain glory and refinement.  She is one of nature's ladies, and
when I hear her tell I know not what stories of her friends, or
her children, or her   pensioners, I find a pathetic eloquence
which I know not where to match.  But I suppose you shall never
hear it.  Every American is a little displaced in London, and, no
doubt, her company has grown to her.  Her husband is a banker
connected in business with your ---, and is a man of elegant
genius and tastes, and his house is a resort for fine people.
Thorwaldsen distinguished Mrs. --- in Rome, formerly, by his
attentions.  Powers the sculptor made an admirable bust of her;
Clough and Thackeray will tell you of her.  Jenny Lind, like the
rest, was captivated by her, and was married at her house.  Is
not Henry James in London? he knows her well.  If Tennyson comes
to London, whilst she is there, he should see her for his "Lays
of Good Women."  Now please to read these things to the wise and
kind ears of Jane Carlyle, and ask her if I have done wrong in
giving my friend a letter to her?  I could not ask more than that
each of those ladies might appear to the other what each has
appeared to me.

I saw Thackeray, in the winter, and he said he would come and see
me here, in April or May;  but he is still, I believe, in the
South and West.  Do not believe me for my reticency less hungry
for letters.  I grieve at the want and loss, and am about writing
again, that I may hear from you.

Ever affectionately yours,
R.W. Emerson




CLIX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson;--Welcome was your Letter to me, after the long
interval;  as welcome as any human Letter could now well be.
These many months and years I have been sunk in what disastrous
vortexes of foreign wreck you know, till I am fallen sick and
almost broken-hearted, and my life (if it were not this one
interest, of doing a problem which I see to be impossible, and of
smallish value if found doable!) is burdensome and without
meaning to me.  It is so rarely I hear the voice of a magnanimous
Brother Man addressing any word to me:  ninety-nine hundredths of
the Letters I get are impertinent clutchings of me by the button,
concerning which the one business is, How to get handsomely loose
again;  What to say that shall soonest _end_ the intrusion,--if
saying Nothing will not be the best way.  Which last I often in
my sorrow have recourse to, at what ever known risks.  "We must
pay our tribute to Time":  ah yes, yes;--and yet I will believe,
so long as we continue together in this sphere of things there
will always be a _potential_ Letter coming out of New England for
me, and the world not fallen irretrievably dumb.--The best is, I
am about going into Scotland, in two days, into deep solitude,
for a couple of months beside the Solway sea:  I absolutely need
to have the dust blown out of me, and my mad nerves rested (there
is nothing else quite gone wrong):  this unblest _Life of
Frederick_ is now actually to get along into the Printer's hand;
--a good Book being impossible upon it, there shall a bad one be
done, and one's poor existence rid of it:--for which great object
two months of voluntary torpor are considered the fair
preliminary.  In another year's time, (if the Fates allow me to
live,) I expect to have got a great deal of rubbish swept into
chaos again.  Unlucky it should ever have been dug up, much
of it!--

Your Mrs. --- should have had our best welcome, for the sake of
him who sent her, had there been nothing more:  but the Lady
never showed face at all;  nor could I for a long time get any
trace--and then it was a most faint and distant one as if by
_double_ reflex--of her whereabout:  too distant, too difficult
for me, who do not make a call once in the six months lately.  I
did mean to go in quest (never had an _address_);  but had not
yet rallied for the Enterprise, when Mrs. --- herself wrote that
she had been unwell, that she was going directly for Paris, and
would see us on her return.  So be it:--pray only I may not be
absent next!  I have not seen or distinctly heard of Miss Bacon
for a year and half past:  I often ask myself, what has become of
that poor Lady, and wish I knew of her being safe among her
friends again.  I have even lost the address (which at any rate
was probably not a lasting one);  perhaps I could find it by the
eye,--but it is five miles away;  and my _non-plus-ultra_ for
years past is not above half that distance.  Heigho!

My time is all up and more;  and Chaos come again is lying round
me, in the shape of "packing," in a thousand shapes!--Browning is
coming tonight to take leave.  Do you know Browning at all?  He
is abstruse, but worth knowing.--And what of the _Discourse on
England_ by a certain man?  Shame!  We always hear of it again as
"out";  and it continues obstinately _in._  Adieu, my friend.

Ever yours,
T. Carlyle




CLX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Your Letter alighted here yesterday;  like a
winged Mercury, bringing "airs from Heaven" (in a sense) along
with his news.  I understand very well your indisposition to
write;  we must conform to it, as to the law of _Chronos_ (oldest
of the gods);  but I will murmur always, "It is such a pity as of
almost no other man!"--You are citizen of a "Republic," and
perhaps fancy yourself republican in an eminent degree:
nevertheless I have remarked there is no man of whom I am so
certain always to get something _kingly:_--and whenever your huge
inarticulate America gets settled into _kingdoms,_ of the New
Model, fit for these Ages which are all upon the _Moult_ just
now, and dreadfully like going to the Devil in the interim,--then
will America, and all nations through her, owe the man Emerson a
_debt,_ far greater than either they or he are in the least aware
of at present!  That I consider (for myself) to be an ascertained
fact.  For which I myself at least am thankful and have long been.

It pleases me much to know that this English [book], so long
twinkling in our expectations and always drawn back again, is at
last verily to appear:  I wish I could get hold of my copy:
there is no Book that would suit me better just now.  But we must
wait for four weeks till we get back to Chelsea,--unless I call
find some trusty hand to extract it from the rubbish that will
have accumulated there, and forward it by post.  You speak as if
there were something dreadful said of my own sacred self in that
Book:  Courage, my Friend, it will be a most miraculous
occurrence to meet with anything said by you that does me _ill;_
whether the immediate taste of it be sweet or bitter, I will take
it with gratitude, you may depend,--nay even with pleasure, what
perhaps is still more incredible.  But an old man deluged for
half a century with the brutally nonsensical vocables of his
fellow-creatures (which he grows to regard soon as _rain,_ "rain
of frogs" or the like, and lifts his umbrella against with
indifference),--such an old gentleman, I assure you, is grateful
for a word that he can recognize perennial sense in;  as in this
case is his sure hope.  And so be the little Book thrice welcome;
and let all England understand (as some choice portion of England
will) that there has not been a man talking about us these very
many years whose words are worth the least attention in comparison.

"Post passing!"  I must end, in mid-course;  so much still
untouched upon.  Thanks for Sampson & Co., and let them go their
course upon me.  If I can see Mrs. --- about the end of September
or after, I shall be right glad:--but I fear she will have fled
before that?--

I am here in my native Country, riding, seabathing, living on
country diet,--uttering no word,--now into the fifth week;  have
had such a "retreat" as no La Trappe hardly could have offered
me.  A "retreat" _without cilices,_ thistle-mattresses;  and with
_silent_ devotions (if any) instead of blockhead spoken ones to
the Virgin and others!  There is still an Excursion to the
Highlands ahead, which cannot be avoided;--then home again to
_peine forte et dure._  Good be with you always, dear friend.

T. Carlyle




CLXI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--I am really grieved to have hurt the feelings of
Mr. Phillips;  a gentleman to whom I, on my side, had no
feelings but those of respect and good will!  I pray you smooth
him down again, by all wise methods, into at least good-natured
indifference to me.  He may depend upon it I could not mean to
irritate him;  there lay no gain for me in that!  Nor is there
anything of business left now between us.  It is doubly and
trebly evident those Stereotype Plates are not to him worth their
prime cost here, still less, their prime cost plus any vestige of
definite motive for me to concern myself in them:--whereupon the
Project falls on its face, and vanishes forever, with apologies
all round.  For as to that other method, that is a game I never
thought, and never should think of playing at!  You may also tell
him this little Biographical fact, if you think it will any way
help.  Some ten or more years ago, I made a similar Bargain with
a New York House (known to you, and now I believe extinct):  "10"
or something "percent," of selling price on the Copies Printed,
was to be my return--not for four or five hundred pounds money
laid out, but for various things I did, which gratis would by no
means have been done;  in fine, it was their own Offer, made and
accepted in due form;  "10 percent on the copies printed."

And how many were "printed," thinks Mr. Phillips?  I saw one set;
dreadfully ugly Books, errors in every page;--and to this hour I
have never heard of any other!  The amount remains zero net;  and
it would appear there was simply one copy "printed," the ugly one
sent to myself, which I instantly despatched again somewhither!
On second thought perhaps you had better _not_ tell Mr. Phillips
this story, at least not in this way.  _His_ integrity I would
not even question by insinuation, nor need I, at the point where
we now are.  I perceive he sees in extraordinary brilliancy of
illumination his own side of the bargain;  and thinks me ignorant
of several things which I am well enough informed about.  In
brief, make a perfect peace between us, O friend, and man of
peace;  and let the wampums be all wrapped up, and especially the
tomahawks entirely buried, and the thing end forever!  To you
also I owe apologies;  but not to you do I pay them, knowing from
of old what you are to me.  Enough, enough!

I got your Book by post in the Highlands;  and had such a day
over it as falls rarely to my lot!  Not for seven years and more
have I got hold of such a Book;--Book by a real man, with eyes in
his head;  nobleness, wisdom, humor, and many other things, in
the heart of him.  Such Books do not turn up often in the decade,
in the century.  In fact I believe it to be worth all the Books
ever written by New England upon Old.  Franklin might have
written such a thing (in his own way);  no other since!  We do
very well with it here, and the wise part of us _best._  That
Chapter on the Church is inimitable;  "the Bishop asking a
troublesome gentleman to take wine,"--you should see the kind of
grin it awakens here on our best kind of faces.  Excellent the
manner of that, and the matter too dreadfully _true_ in every
part.  I do not much seize your idea in regard to "Literature,"
though I do details of it, and will try again.  Glad of that too,
even in its half state;  not "sorry" at _any_ part of it,--you
Sceptic!  On the whole, write _again,_ and ever again at greater
length:  there lies your only fault to me.  And yet I know, that
also is a right noble one, and rare in our day.

O my friend, save always for me some corner in your memory;  I am
very lonely in these months and years,--sunk to the centre of the
Earth, like to be throttled by the Pythons and Mudgods in my old
days;--but shall get out again, too; and be a better boy!  No
"hurry" equals mine, and it is in permanence.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CLXII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I see no way for you to avoid the Americans but
to come to America.  For, first or last, we are all embarking,
and all steering straight to your door.  Mr. and Mrs. Joseph
Longworth of Cincinnati are going abroad on their travels.
Possibly, the name is not quite unknown to you.  Their father,
Nicholas Longworth, is one of the founders of the city of
Cincinnati, a bigger town than Boston, where he is a huge land
lord and planter, and patron of sculptors and painters.  And his
family are most favorably known to all dwellers and strangers, in
the Ohio Valley, as people who have well used their great wealth.
His chief merit is to have introduced a systematic culture of the
wine-grape and wine manufacture, by the importing and settlement
of German planters in that region, and the trade is thriving to
the general benefit.  His son Joseph is a well-bred gentleman of
literary tastes, whose position and good heart make him largely
hospitable.  His wife is a very attractive and excellent woman,
and they are good friends of mine.  It seems I have at some
former time told her that, when she went to England, she should
see you.  And they are going abroad, soon, for the first time.
If you are in London, you must be seen of them.

But I hailed even this need of taxing once more your often taxed
courtesy, as a means to break up my long contumacy to-you-ward.
Please let not the wires be rusted out, so that we cannot weld
them again, and let me feel the subtle fluid streaming strong.
Tell me what is become of _Frederic,_ for whose appearance I have
watched every week for months?  I am better ready for him, since
one or two books about Voltaire, Maupertuis, and company, fell in
my way.

Yet that book will not come which I most wish to read, namely,
the culled results, the quintessence of private conviction, a
_liber veritatis,_ a few sentences, hints of the final moral you
drew from so much penetrating inquest into past and present men.
All writing is necessitated to be exoteric, and written to a
human should instead of to the terrible is.  And I say this to
you, because you are the truest and bravest of writers.  Every
writer is a skater, who must go partly where he would, and
partly, where the skates carry him;  or a sailor, who can only
land where sails can be safely blown.  The variations to be
allowed for in the surveyor's compass are nothing like so large
as those that must be allowed for in every book.  And a
friendship of old gentlemen who have got rid of many illusions,
survived their ambition, and blushes, and passion for euphony,
and surface harmonies, and tenderness for their accidental
literary stores, but have kept all their curiosity and awe
touching the problems of man and fate and the Cause of causes,--a
friendship of old gentlemen of this fortune is looking more
comely and profitable than anything I have read of love.  Such a
dream flatters my incapacities for conversation, for we can all
play at monosyllables, who cannot attempt the gay pictorial
panoramic styles.

So, if ever I hear that you have betrayed the first symptom of
age, that your back is bent a twentieth of an inch from the
perpendicular, I shall hasten to believe you are shearing your
prodigal overgrowths, and are calling in your troops to the
citadel, and I may come in the first steamer to drop in of
evenings and hear the central monosyllables.

Be good now again, and send me quickly--though it be the shortest
autograph certificate of....



CLXIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Glad indeed I am to hear of you on any terms, on
any subject.  For the last eighteen months I have pretty much
ceased all human correspondence,--writing no Note that was not in
a sense wrung from me;  my one society the _Nightmares_ (Prussian
and other) all that while:--but often and often the image of you,
and the thoughts of old days between us, has risen sad upon me;
and I have waited to get loose from the Nightmares to appeal to
you again,--to edacious Time and you.  Most likely in a couple of
weeks you would have heard from me again at any rate.--Your
friends shall be welcome to me;  no friend of yours can be other
at any time.  Nor in fact did anybody ever sent by you prove
other than pleasant in this house, so pray no apologies on that
small score.--If only these Cincinnati Patricians can find me
here when they come?  For I am off to the deepest solitudes
discoverable (native Scotland probably) so soon as I can shake
the final tag rags of Printer people off me;--"surely within
three weeks now!" I say to myself.  But I shall be back, too, if
all prosper;  and your Longworths will be back;  and Madam will
stand to her point, I hope.

That book on Friedrich of Prussia--first half of it, two swoln
unlovely volumes, which treat mainly of his Father, &c., and
leave him at his accession--is just getting out of my hands.  One
packet more of Proofs, and I have done with it,--thanks to all
the gods!  No job approaching in ugliness to it was ever cut out
for me;  nor had I any motive to go on, except the sad negative
one, "Shall we be beaten in our old days, then?"--But it has
thoroughly humbled me,--trampled me down into the _mud,_ there to
wrestle with the accumulated stupidities of Mankind, German,
English, French, and other, for _all_ have borne a hand in these
sad centuries;--and here I emerge at last, not _killed,_ but
almost as good.  Seek not to look at the Book,--nay in fact it is
"not to be _published_ till September" (so the man of affairs
settles with me yesterday, "owing to the political &c., to the
season," &c.);  my only stipulation was that in ten days I should
be utterly out of it,--not to hear of it again till the Day of
Judgment, and if possible not even then!  In fact it is a bad
book, poor, misshapen, feeble, _nearly_ worthless (thanks to
_past_ generations and to me);  and my one excuse is, I could not
make it better, all the world having played such a game with it.
Well, well!--How true is that you say about the skater;  and the
rider too depending on his vehicles, on his roads, on his et
ceteras!  Dismally true have I a thousand times felt it, in these
late operations;  never in any so much.  And in short the
business of writing has altogether become contemptible to me;
and I am become confirmed in the notion that nobody ought to
write,--unless sheer Fate force him to do it;--and then he ought
(if _not_ of the mountebank genus) to beg to be shot rather.
That is deliberately my opinion,--or far nearer it than you
will believe.

Once or twice I caught some tone of you in some American
Magazine;  utterances highly noteworthy to me;  in a sense, the
only thing that is _speech_ at all among my fellow-creatures in
this time.  For the years that remain, I suppose we must continue
to grumble out some occasional utterance of that kind:  what can
we do, at this late stage?  But in the _real_ "Model Republic,"
it would have been different with two good boys of this kind!--

Though shattered and trampled down to an immense degree, I do not
think any bones are broken yet,--though age truly is here, and
you may engage your berth in the steamer whenever you like.  In a
few months I expect to be sensibly improved;  but my poor Wife
suffers sadly the last two winters;  and I am much distressed by
that item of our affairs.  Adieu, dear Emerson:  I have lost many
things;  let me not lose you till I must in some way!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle

P.S.  If you read the Newspapers (which I carefully abstain from
doing) they will babble to you about Dickens's "Separation from
Wife," &c., &c.;  fact of Separation I believe is true;  but all
the rest is mere lies and nonsense.  No crime or misdemeanor
specifiable on either side;  _unhappy_ together, these good many
years past, and they at length end it.--Sulzer said, "Men are by
nature _good._"  "Ach, mein lieber Sulzer, Er kennt nicht diese
verdammte Race," ejaculated Fritz, at hearing such an axiom.




CLXIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Long months ago there was sent off for you a copy
of _Friedrich_ of Prussia, two big red volumes (for which Chapman
the Publisher had found some "safe, swift" vehicle);  and _now_ I
have reason to fear they are still loitering somewhere, or at
least have long loitered sorrow on them!  This is to say:  If you
have not _yet_ got them, address a line to "Saml. F. Flower, Esq,
Librarian of Antiquarian Society, _Worcester,_ Mass." (forty
miles from you, they say), and that will at once bring them.  In
the Devil's name!  I never in my life was so near choked;
swimming in this mother of Dead Dogs, and a long spell of it
still ahead!  I profoundly _pity myself_ (if no one else does).
You shall hear of me again if I survive,--but really that is
getting beyond a joke with me, and I ought to hold my peace (even
to you), and swim what I can.  Your little touch of Human Speech
on _Burns'_ was charming;  had got into the papers here (and
been clipt out by me) before your copy came, and has gone far and
wide since.  Newberg was to give it me in German, from the
_Allgemeine Zeitung,_ but lost the leaf.  Adieu, my Friend;  very
dear to me, tho' dumb.

T. Carlyle (in such haste as seldom was).




CLXIV. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Carlyle,--Some three weeks ago came to me a note from Mr.
Haven of Worcester, announcing the arrival there of "King
Friedrich," and, after a fortnight, the good book came to my
door.  A week later, your letter arrived.  I was heartily glad to
get the crimson Book itself.  I had looked for it with the first
ships.  As it came not, I had made up my mind to that hap also.
It was quite fair:  I had disentitled myself.  He, the true
friend, had every right to punish me for my sluggish contumacy,--
backsliding, too, after penitence.  So I read with resignation
our blue American reprint, and I enclose to you a leaf from my
journal at the time, which leaf I read afterwards in one of my
lectures at the Music Hall in Boston.  But the book came from the
man himself.  He did not punish me.  He is loyal, but royal as
well, and, I have always noted, has a whim for dealing _en grand
monarque._  The book came, with its irresistible inscription, so
that I am all tenderness and all but tears.  The book too is
sovereignly written.  I think you the true inventor of the
stereoscope, as having exhibited that art in style, long before
we had heard of it in drawing.

The letter came also.  Every child of mine knows from far that
handwriting, and brings it home with speed.  I read without alarm
the pathetical hints of your sad plight in the German labyrinth.
I know too well what invitations and assurance brought you in
there, to fear any lack of guides to bring you out.  More
presence of mind and easy change from the microscopic to the
telescopic view does not exist.  I await peacefully your issue
from your pretended afflictions.

What to tell you of my coop and byre?  Ah! you are a very poor
fellow, and must be left with your glory.  You hug yourself on
missing the illusion of children, and must be pitied as having
one glittering toy the less.  I am a victim all my days to
certain graces of form and behavior, and can never come into
equilibrium.  Now I am fooled by my own young people, and grow
old contented.  The heedless children suddenly take the keenest
hold on life, and foolish papas cling to the world on their
account, as never on their own.  Out of sympathy, we _make
believe_ to value the prizes of their ambition and hope.  My, two
girls, pupils once or now of Agassiz, are good, healthy,
apprehensive, decided young people, who love life.  My boy
divides his time between Cicero and cricket, knows his boat, the
birds, and Walter Scott--verse and prose, through and through,--
and will go to College next year.  Sam Ward and I tickled each
other the other day, in looking over a very good company of young
people, by finding in the new comers a marked improvement on
their parents.  There, I flatter myself, I see some emerging of
our people from the prison of their politics.  The insolvency of
slavery shows and stares, and we shall perhaps live to see that
putrid Black-vomit extirpated by mere dying and planting.

I am so glad to find myself speaking once more to you, that I
mean to persist in the practice.  Be as glad as you have been.
You and I shall not know each other on this platform as long as
we have known.  A correspondence even of twenty-five years should
not be disused unless through some fatal event.  Life is too
short, and, with all our poetry and morals, too indigent to allow
such sacrifices.  Eyes so old and wary, and which have learned to
look on so much, are gathering an hourly harvest,--and I cannot
spare what on noble terms is offered me.

With congratulations to Jane Carlyle on the grandeur of the Book,

Yours affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




CLXV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Can booksellers break the seal which the gods
do not, and put me in communication again with the loyalest of
men?  On the ground of Mr. Wight's honest proposal to give you a
benefit from his edition, I, though unwilling, allowed him to
copy the Daguerre of your head.  The publishers ask also some
expression of your good will to their work....

I commend you to the gods who love and uphold you, and who do not
like to make their great gifts vain, but teach us that the best
life-insurance is a great task.  I hold you to be one of those to
whom all is permitted, and who carry the laws in their hand.
Continue to be good to your old friends.  'T is no matter whether
they write to you or not.  If not, they save your time.  When
_Friedrich_ is once despatched to gods and men, there was once
some talk that you should come to America!  You shall have an
ovation such, and on such sincerity, as none have had.

Ever affectionately yours,
R.W. Emerson

I do not know Mr. Wight, but he sends his open letter, which I
fear is already old, for me to write in:  and I will not keep it,
lest it lose another steamer.




CLXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--It is a special favor of Heaven to me that I hear
of you again by this accident;  and am made to answer a word _de
Profundis._  It is constantly among the fairest of the few hopes
that remain for me on the other side of this Stygian Abyss of a
_Friedrich_ (should I ever get through it alive) that I _shall
then_ begin writing to you again, who knows if not see you in the
body before quite taking wing!  For I feel always, what I have
some times written, that there is (in a sense) but one completely
human voice to me in the world;  and that you are it, and have
been,--thanks to you, whether you speak or not!  Let me say also,
while I am at it, that the few words you sent me about those
first Two volumes are present with me in the far more frightful
darknesses of these last Two;  and indeed are often almost my one
encouragement.  That is a fact, and not exaggerated, though you
think it is.  I read some criticisms of my wretched Book, and
hundreds of others I in the gross refused to read;  they were in
praise, they were in blame;  but not one of them looked into the
eyes of the object, and in genuine human fashion responded to its
human strivings, and recognized it,--completely right, though
with generous exaggeration!  That was well done, I can tell you:
a human voice, far out in the waste deeps, among the inarticulate
sea-krakens and obscene monsters, loud-roaring, inexpressibly
ugly, dooming you as if to eternal solitude by way of wages,--
"hath exceeding much refreshment in it," as my friend Oliver used
to say.

Having not one spare moment at present, I will answer to _you_
only the whole contents of that letter;  you in your charity will
convey to Mr. Wight what portion belongs to him.  Wight, if you
have a chance of him, is worth knowing;  a genuine bit of metal,
too thin and ringing for my tastes (hammered, in fact, upon the
Yankee anvils), but recognizably of steel and with a keen fire-
edge.  Pray signify to him that he has done a thing agreeable to
me, and that it will be pleasant if I find it will not hurt
_him._  Profit to me out of it, except to keep his own soul clear
and sound (to his own sense, as it always will be to mine), is
perfectly indifferent;  and on the whole I thank him heartily for
showing me a chivalrous human brother, instead of the usual
vulturous, malodorous, and much avoidable phenomenon, in
Transatlantic Bibliopoly!  This is accurately true;  and so far
as his publisher and he can extract encouragement from this, in
the face of vested interests which I cannot judge of, it is
theirs without reserve....

Adieu, my friend;  I have not written so much in the Letter way,
not, I think, since you last heard of me.  In my despair it often
seems as if I should never write more;  but be sunk here, and
perish miserably in the most undoable, least worthy, most
disgusting and heart breaking of all the labors I ever had.  But
perhaps also not, not quite.  In which case--

Yours ever truly at any rate,
T. Carlyle

No time to re-read.  I suppose you can decipher.




CLXVII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--The sight of my hand-writing will, I know, be
welcome again.  Though I literally do not write the smallest Note
once in a month, or converse with anything but Prussian
Nightmares of a hideous [nature], and with my Horse (who is human
in comparison), and with my poor Wife (who is altogether human,
and heroically cheerful to me, in her poor weak state),--I must
use the five minutes, which have fallen to me today, in
acknowledgment, _du_e by all laws terrestrial and celestial, of
the last Book that has come from you.

I read it a great while ago, mostly in sheets, and again read it
in the finely printed form,--I can tell you, if you do not
already guess, with a satisfaction given me by the Books of no
other living mortal.  I predicted to your English Bookseller a
great sale even, reckoning it the best of all your Books.  What
the sale was or is I nowhere learned;  but the basis of my
prophecy remains like the rocks, and will remain.  Indeed, except
from my Brother John, I have heard no criticism that had much
rationality,--some of them incredibly irrational (if that matter
had not altogether become a barking of dogs among us);--but I
always believe there are in the mute state a great number of
thinking English souls, who can recognize a Thinker and a Sayer,
of perennially human type and welcome him as the rarest of
miracles, in "such a spread of knowledge" as there now is:--one
English soul of that kind there indubitably is;  and I certify
hereby, notarially if you like, that such is emphatically his
view of the matter.  You have grown older, more pungent,
piercing;--I never read from you before such lightning-gleams of
meaning as are to be found here.  The finale of all, that of
"Illusions" falling on us like snow-showers, but again of "the
gods sitting steadfast on their thrones" all the while,--what a
_Fiat Lux_ is there, into the deeps of a philosophy, which the
vulgar has not, which hardly three men living have, yet dreamt
of!  _Well done,_ I say;  and so let that matter rest.

I am still twelve months or so from the end of my Task;  very
uncertain often whether I can, even at this snail's pace, hold
out so long.  In my life I was never worn nearly so low, and seem
to get _weaker_ monthly.  Courage!  If I do get through, you
shall hear of me, again.

Yours forever,
T. Carlyle




CLXVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--...I have to thank you for the cordial note
which brought me joy, many weeks ago.  It was noble and welcome
in all but its boding account of yourself and your task.  But I
have had experience of your labors, and these deplorations I have
long since learned to distrust.  We have settled it in America,
as I doubt not it is settled in England, that _Frederick_ is a
history which a beneficent Providence is not very likely to
interrupt.  And may every kind and tender influence near you and
over you keep the best head in England from all harm.

Affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




CLXIX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--Long ago, as soon as swift steamers could bring
the new book across the sea, I received the third volume of
_Friedrich,_ with your autograph inscription, and read it with
joy.  Not a word went to the beloved author, for I do not write
or think.  I would wait perhaps for happier days, as our
President Lincoln will not even emancipate slaves, until on the
heels of a victory, or the semblance of such.  But he waited in
vain for his triumph, nor dare I in my heavy months expect bright
days.  The book was heartily grateful, and square to the author's
imperial scale.  You have lighted the glooms, and engineered away
the pits, whereof you poetically pleased yourself with
complaining, in your sometime letter to me, clean out of it,
according to the high Italian rule, and have let sunshine and
pure air enfold the scene.  First, I read it honestly through for
the history;  then I pause and speculate on the Muse that
inspires, and the friend that reports it.  'T is sovereignly
written, above all literature, dictating to all mortals what they
shall accept as fated and final for their salvation.  It is
Mankind's Bill of Rights and Duties, the royal proclamation of
Intellect ascending the throne, announcing its good pleasure,
that, hereafter, _as heretofore,_ and now once for all, the World
shall be governed by Common Sense and law of Morals, or shall go
to ruin.

But the manner of it!--the author sitting as Demiurgus, trotting
out his manikins, coaxing and bantering them, amused with their
good performance, patting them on the back, and rating the
naughty dolls when they misbehave;  and communicating his mind
ever in measure, just as much as the young public can understand;
hinting the future, when it would be useful;  recalling now and
then illustrative antecedents of the actor, impressing, the
reader that he is in possession of the entire history centrally
seen, that his investigation has been exhaustive, and that he
descends too on the petty plot of Prussia from higher and
cosmical surveys.  Better I like the sound sense and the absolute
independence of the tone, which may put kings in fear.  And, as
the reader shares, according to his intelligence, the haughty
_coup d'oeil_ of this genius, and shares it with delight, I
recommend to all governors, English, French, Austrian, and other,
to double their guards, and look carefully to the censorship of
the press.  I find, as ever in your books, that one man has
deserved well of mankind for restoring the Scholar's profession
to its highest use and dignity.  I find also that you are very
wilful, and have made a covenant with your eyes that they shall
not see anything you do not wish they should.  But I was heartily
glad to read somewhere that your book was nearly finished in the
manuscript, for I could wish you to sit and taste your fame, if
that were not contrary to law of Olympus.  My joints ache to
think of your rugged labor.  Now that you have conquered to
yourself such a huge kingdom among men, can you not give yourself
breath, and chat a little, an Emeritus in the eternal university,
and write a gossiping letter to an old American friend or so?
Alas, I own that I have no right to say this last,--I who
write never.

Here we read no books.  The war is our sole and doleful
instructor.  All our bright young men go into it, to be misused
and sacrificed hitherto by incapable leaders.  One lesson they
all learn,--to hate slavery, _teterrima causa._  But the issue
does not yet appear.  We must get ourselves morally right.
Nobody can help us.  'T is of no account what England or France
may do.  Unless backed by our profligate parties, their action
would be nugatory, and, if so backed, the worst.  But even the
war is better than the degrading and descending politics that
preceded it for decades of years, and our legislation has made
great strides, and if we can stave off that fury of trade which
rushes to peace at the cost of replacing the South in the _status
ante bellum,_ we can, with something more of courage, leave the
problem to another score of years,--free labor to fight with the
Beast, and see if bales and barrels and baskets cannot find out
that they pass more commodiously and surely to their ports
through free hands, than through barbarians.

I grieved that the good Clough, the generous, susceptible
scholar, should die.  I read over his _Bothie_ again, full of the
wine of youth at Oxford.  I delight in Matthew Arnold's fine
criticism in two little books.  Give affectionate remembrances
from me to Jane Carlyle, whom ---'s happiness and accurate
reporting restored to me in brightest image.

Always faithfully yours,
R.W. Emerson




CLXX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--This will be delivered to you by the Hon. Lyulph
Stanley, an excellent, intelligent young gentleman whom I have
known ever since his infancy,--his father and mother being among
my very oldest friends in London;  "Lord and Lady Stanley of
Alderley" (not of Knowesley, but a cadet branch of it), whom
perhaps you did not meet while here.

My young Friend is coming to look with his own eyes at your huge
and hugely travailing Country;--and I think will agree with you,
better than he does with me, in regard to that latest phenomenon.
At all events, he regards "Emerson" as intelligent Englishmen all
do;  and you will please me much by giving him your friendliest
reception and furtherance,--which I can certify that he deserves
for his own sake, not counting mine at all.

Probably _he_ may deliver you the Vol. IV. of _Frederic;_  he
will tell you our news (part of which, what regards my poor Wife,
is very bad, though God be thanked not yet the worst);--and, in
some six months, he may bring me back some human tidings from
Concord, a place which always inhabits my memory,--though it is
so dumb latterly!

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CLXXI. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Carlyle,--Your friend, young Stanley, brought me your letter
now too many days ago.  It contained heavy news of your
household,--yet such as in these our autumnal days we must await
with what firmness we can.  I hear with pain that your Wife, whom
I have only seen beaming goodness and intelligence, has suffered
and suffers so severely.  I recall my first visit to your house,
when I pronounced you wise and fortunate in relations wherein
best men are often neither wise nor fortunate.  I had already
heard rumors of her serious illness.  Send me word, I pray you,
that there is better health and hope.  For the rest, the Colonna
motto would fit your letter, "Though sad, I am strong."

I had received in July, forwarded by Stanley, on his flight
through Boston, the fourth Volume of _Friedrich,_ and it was my
best reading in the summer, and for weeks my only reading:  One
fact was paramount in all the good I drew from it, that
whomsoever many years had used and worn, they had not yet broken
any fibre of your force:--a pure joy to me, who abhor the inroads
which time makes on me and on my friends.  To live too long is
the capital misfortune, and I sometimes think, if we shall not
parry it by better art of living, we shall learn to include in
our morals some bolder control of the facts.  I read once, that
Jacobi declared that he had some thoughts which--if he should
entertain them--would put him to death:  and perhaps we have
weapons in our intellectual armory that are to save us from
disgrace and impertinent relation to the world we live in.  But
this book will excuse you from any unseemly haste to make up your
accounts, nay, holds you to fulfil your career with all amplitude
and calmness.  I found joy and pride in it, and discerned a
golden chain of continuity not often seen in the works of men,
apprising me that one good head and great heart remained in
England,--immovable, superior to his own eccentricities and
perversities, nay, wearing these, I can well believe, as a jaunty
coat or red cockade to defy or mislead idlers, for the better
securing his own peace, and the very ends which the idlers fancy
he resists.  England's lease of power is good during his days.

I have in these last years lamented that you had not made the
visit to America, which in earlier years you projected or
favored.  It would have made it impossible that your name should
be cited for one moment on the side of the enemies of mankind.
Ten days' residence in this country would have made you the organ
of the sanity of England and of Europe to us and to them, and
have shown you the necessities and aspirations which struggle up
in our Free States, which, as yet, have no organ to others, and
are ill and unsteadily articulated here.  In our today's division
of Republican and Democrat, it is certain that the American
nationality lies in the Republican party (mixed and multiform
though that party be);  and I hold it not less certain, that,
viewing all the nationalities of the world, the battle for
Humanity is, at this hour, in America.  A few days here would
show you the disgusting composition of the Party which within the
Union resists the national action.  Take from it the wild Irish
element, imported in the last twenty-five year's into this
country, and led by Romish Priests, who sympathize, of course,
with despotism, and you would bereave it of all its numerical
strength.  A man intelligent and virtuous is not to be found on
that side.  Ah! how gladly I would enlist you, with your
thunderbolt, on our part!  How gladly enlist the wise,
thoughtful, efficient pens and voices of England!  We want
England and Europe to hold our people stanch to their best
tendency.  Are English of this day incapable of a great
sentiment?  Can they not leave caviling at petty failures, and
bad manners, and at the dunce part (always the largest part in
human affairs), and leap to the suggestions and finger-pointings
of the gods, which, above the understanding, feed the hopes and
guide the wills of men?  This war has been conducted over the
heads of all the actors in it;  and the foolish terrors, "What
shall we do with the negro?"  "The entire black population is
coming North to be fed," &c., have strangely ended in the fact
that the black refuses to leave his climate;  gets his living and
the living of his employers there, as he has always done;  is the
natural ally and soldier of the Republic, in that climate;  now
takes the place of two hundred thousand white soldiers;  and will
be, as the conquest of the country proceeds, its garrison, till
peace, without slavery, returns.  Slaveholders in London have
filled English ears with their wishes and perhaps beliefs;  and
our people, generals, and politicians have carried the like, at
first, to the war, until corrected by irresistible experience.  I
shall always respect War hereafter.  The cost of life, the dreary
havoc of comfort and time, are overpaid by the vistas it opens of
Eternal Life, Eternal Law, reconstructing and uplifting Society,
--breaks up the old horizon, and we see through the rifts a wider.
The dismal Malthus, the dismal DeBow, have had their night.

Our Census of 1860, and the War, are poems, which will, in the
next age, inspire a genius like your own.  I hate to write you a
newspaper, but, in these times, 't is wonderful what sublime
lessons I have once and again read on the Bulletin-boards in the
streets.  Everybody has been wrong in his guess, except good
women, who never despair of an Ideal right.

I thank you for sending to me so gracious a gentleman as Mr.
Stanley, who interested us in every manner, by his elegance, his
accurate information of that we wished to know, and his
surprising acquaintance with the camp and military politics on
our frontier.  I regretted that I could see him so little.  He
has used his time to the best purpose, and I should gladly have
learned all his adventures from so competent a witness.  Forgive
this long writing, and keep the old kindness which I prize above
words.  My kindest salutations to the dear invalid!

R.W. Emerson




CLXXII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Though my hand is shaking (as you sadly notice) I
determine to write you a little Note today.  What a severance
there has been these many sad years past!--In the first days of
February I ended my weary Book;  a totally worn-out man, got to
shore again after far the ugliest sea he had ever swam in.  In
April or the end of March, when the book was published, I duly
handed out a Copy for Concord and you;  it was to be sent by
mail;  but, as my Publisher (a _new_ Chapman, very unlike the
_old_) discloses to me lately an incredible negligence on such
points, it is quite possible the dog may _not,_ for a long while,
have put it in the Post-Office (though he faithfully charged me
the postage of it, and was paid), and that the poor waif may
never yet have reached you!  Patience:  it will come soon
enough,--there are two thick volumes, and they will stand you a
great deal of reading;  stiff rather than "light."

Since February last, I have been sauntering about in Devonshire,
in Chelsea, hither, thither;  idle as a dry bone, in fact, a
creature sinking into deeper and deeper _collapse,_ after twelve
years of such mulish pulling and pushing;  creature now good for
nothing seemingly, and much indifferent to being so in
permanence, if that be the arrangement come upon by the Powers
that made us.  Some three or four weeks ago, I came rolling down
hither, into this old nook of my Birthland, to see poor old
Annandale again with eyes, and the poor remnants of kindred and
loved ones still left me there;  I was not at first very lucky
(lost sleep, &c.);  but am now doing better, pretty much got
adjusted to my new element, new to me since about six years
past,--the longest absence I ever had from it before.  My Work
was getting desperate at that time;  and I silently said to
myself, "We won't return till _it_ is done, or _you_ are done,
my man!"

This is my eldest living sister's house;  one of the most rustic
Farmhouses in the world, but abounding in all that is needful to
me, especially in the truest, _silently_-active affection, the
humble generosity of which is itself medicine and balm.  The
place is airy, on dry waving knolls cheerfully (with such _water_
as I never drank elsewhere, except at Malvern) all round me are
the Mountains, Cheviot and Galloway (three to fifteen miles off),
Cumberland and Yorkshire (say forty and fifty, with the Solway
brine and sands intervening).  I live in total solitude,
sauntering moodily in thin checkered woods, galloping about, once
daily, by old lanes and roads, oftenest latterly on the wide
expanses of Solway shore (when the tide is _out!_) where I see
bright busy Cottages far off, houses over even in Cumberland, and
the beautifulest amphitheatre of eternal Hills,--but meet no
living creature;  and have endless thoughts as loving and as sad
and sombre as I like.  My youngest Brother (whom on the whole I
like best, a rustic man, the express image of my Father in his
ways of living and thinking) is within ten miles of me;  Brother
John "the Doctor" has come down to Dumfries to a sister (twelve
miles off), and runs over to me by rail now and then in few
minutes.  I have Books;  but can hardly be troubled with them.
Pitiful temporary babble and balderdash, in comparison to what
the Silences can say to one.  Enough of all that:  you perceive
me sufficiently at this point of my Pilgrimage, as withdrawn to
_Hades_ for the time being;  intending a month's walk there, till
the muddy semi-solutions settle into sediment according to what
laws they have, and there be perhaps a partial restoration of
clearness.  I have to go deeper into Scotland by and by, perhaps
to try _sailing,_ which generally agrees with me;  but till the
end of September I hope there will be no London farther.  My poor
Wife, who is again poorly since I left (and has had frightful
sufferings, last year especially) will probably join me in this
region before I leave it.  And see here, This is authentically
the way we figure in the eye of the Sun;  and something like what
your spectacles, could they reach across the Ocean into these
nooks, would teach you of us.  There are three Photographs which
I reckon fairly _like;_  _these_ are properly what I had to send
you today,--little thinking that so much surplusage would
accumulate about them;  to which I now at once put an end.  Your
friend Conway, who is a boundless admirer of yours, used to come
our way regularly now and then;  and we always liked him well.  A
man of most gentlemanly, ingenious ways;  turn of thought always
loyal and manly, though tending to be rather _winged_ than
solidly ambulatory.  He talked of coming to Scotland too;  but it
seems uncertain whether we shall meet.  He is clearly rather a
favorite among the London people,--and tries to explain America
to them;  I know not if with any success.  As for me, I have
entirely lost count and reckoning of your enormous element, and
its enormous affairs and procedures for some time past;  and can
only wish (which no man more heartily does) that all may issue in
as blessed a way as you hope.  Fat--(if you know and his fat
commonplace at all) amused me much by a thing he had heard of
yours in some lecture a year or two ago.  "The American Eagle is
a mighty bird;  but what is he to the American Peacock."  At
which all the audience had exploded into laughter.  Very good.
Adieu, old Friend.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle



CLXXIII. Emerson to Carlyle

Dear Carlyle,--Is it too late to send a letter to your door to
claim an old right to enter, and to scatter all your convictions
that I had passed under the earth?  You had not to learn what a
sluggish pen mine is.  Of course, the sluggishness grows on me,
and even such a trumpet at my gate as a letter from you
heralding-in noble books, whilst it gives me joy, cannot heal the
paralysis.  Yet your letter deeply interested me, with the
account of your rest so well earned.  You had fought your great
battle, and might roll in the grass, or ride your pony, or shout
to the Cumberland or Scotland echoes, with largest leave of men
and gods.  My lethargies have not dulled my delight in good
books.  I read these in the bright days of our new peace, which
added a lustre to every genial work.  Now first we had a right to
read, for the very bookworms were driven out of doors whilst the
war lasted.  I found in the book no trace of age, which your
letter so impressively claimed.  In the book, the hand does not
shake, the mind is ubiquitous.  The treatment is so spontaneous,
self-respecting, defiant,--liberties with your hero as if he were
your client, or your son, and you were proud of him, and yet can
check and chide him, and even put him in the corner when he is
not a good boy, freedoms with kings, and reputations, and
nations, yes, and with principles too,--that each reader, I
suppose, feels complimented by the confidences with which he is
honored by this free-tongued, masterful Hermes.--Who knows what
the [Greek] will say next?  This humor of telling the story in a
gale,--bantering, scoffing, at the hero, at the enemy, at the
learned reporters,--is a perpetual flattery to the admiring
student,--the author abusing the whole world as mad dunces,--all
but you and I, reader!  Ellery Channing borrowed my Volumes V.
and VI., worked slowly through them,--midway came to me for
Volumes I., II., III., IV., which he had long already read, and
at last returned all with this word, "If you write to Mr.
Carlyle, you may say to him, that I _have_ read these books,
and they have made it impossible for me to read any other books
but his."

'T is a good proof of their penetrative force, the influence on
the new Stirling, who writes "The Secret of Hegel."  He is quite
as much a student of Carlyle to learn treatment, as of Hegel for
his matter, and plays the same game on his essence-dividing
German, which he has learned of you on _Friedrich._  I have
read a good deal in this book of Stirling's, and have not done
with it.

One or two errata I noticed in the last volumes of _Friedrich,_
though the books are now lent, and I cannot indicate the pages.
Fort Pulaski, which is near Savannah, is set down as near
Charleston.  Charleston, South Carolina, your printer has twice
called Charlestown, which is the name of the town in
Massachusetts in which Bunker Hill stands.--Bancroft told me
that the letters of Montcalm are spurious.  We always write and
say Ticonderoga.

I am sorry that Jonathan looks so unamiable seen from your
island.  Yet I have too much respect for the writing profession
to complain of it.  It is a necessity of rhetoric that there
should be shades, and, I suppose, geography and government always
determine, even for the greatest wits, where they shall lay their
shadows.  But I have always 'the belief that a trip across the
sea would have abated your despair of us.  The world is laid out
here in large lots, and the swing of natural laws is shared by
the population, as it is not--or not as much--in your feudal
Europe.  My countrymen do not content me, but they are
susceptible of inspirations.  In the war it was humanity that
showed itself to advantage,--the leaders were prompted and
corrected by the intuitions of the people, they still demanding
the more generous and decisive measure, and giving their sons and
their estates as we had no example before.  In this heat, they
had sharper perceptions of policy, of the ways and means and the
life of nations, and on every side we read or heard fate-words,
in private letters, in railway cars, or in the journals.  We were
proud of the people and believed they would not go down from this
height.  But Peace came, and every one ran back into his shop
again, and can hardly be won to patriotism more, even to the
point of chasing away the thieves that are stealing not only
the public gold, but the newly won rights of the slave, and
the new muzzles we had contrived to keep the planter from
sucking his blood.

Very welcome to me were the photographs,--your own, and Jane
Carlyle's.  Hers, now seen here for the first time, was closely
scanned, and confirmed the better accounts that had come of her
improved health.  Your earlier tidings of her had not been
encouraging.  I recognized still erect the wise, friendly
presence first seen at Craigenputtock.  Of your own--the hatted
head is good, but more can be read in the head leaning on the
hand, and the one in a cloak.

At the end of much writing, I have little to tell you of myself.
I am a bad subject for autobiography.  As I adjourn letters, so I
adjourn my best tasks.... My wife joins me in very kind regards
to Mrs. Carlyle.  Use your old magnanimity to me, and punish my
stony ingratitudes by new letters from time to time.

Ever affectionately and gratefully yours,
R.W. Emerson




CLXXIV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I have just been shown a private letter from
Moncure Conway to one of his friends here, giving some tidings of
your sad return to an empty home.  We had the first news last
week.  And so it is.  The stroke long threatened has fallen at
last, in the mildest form to its victim, and relieved to you by
long and repeated reprieves.  I must think her fortunate also in
this gentle departure, as she had been in her serene and honored
career.  We would not for ourselves count covetously the
descending steps after we have passed the top of the mount, or
grudge to spare some of the days of decay.  And you will have the
peace of knowing her safe, and no longer a victim.  I have found
myself recalling an old verse which one utters to the parting
soul,--

     "For thou hast passed all chance of human life,
     And not again to thee shall beauty die."

 It is thirty-three years in July, I believe, since I first saw
her, and her conversation and faultless manners gave assurance of
a good and happy future.  As I have not witnessed any decline, I
can hardly believe in any, and still recall vividly the youthful
wife, and her blithe account of her letters and homages from
Goethe, and the details she gave of her intended visit to Weimar,
and its disappointment.  Her goodness to me and to my friends was
ever perfect, and all Americans have agreed in her praise.
Elizabeth Hoar remembers her with entire sympathy and regard.

I could heartily wish to see you for an hour in these lonely
days.  Your friends, I know, will approach you as tenderly as
friends can;  and I can believe that labor--all whose precious
secrets you know--will prove a consoler,--though it cannot quite
avail, for she was the rest that rewarded labor.  It is good that
you are strong, and built for endurance.  Nor will you shun to
consult the awful oracles which in these hours of tenderness are
sometimes vouchsafed.  If to any, to you.

I rejoice that she stayed to enjoy the knowledge of your good day
at Edinburgh, which is a leaf we would not spare from your book
of life.  It was a right manly speech to be so made, and is a
voucher of unbroken strength,--and the surroundings, as I learn,
were all the happiest,--with no hint of change.

I pray you bear in mind your own counsels.  Long years you must
still achieve, and, I hope, neither grief nor weariness will let
you "join the dim choir of the bards that have been," until you
have written the book I wish and wait for,--the sincerest
confessions of your best hours.

My wife prays to be remembered to you with sympathy and affection.

Ever yours faithfully,
R.W. Emerson




CLXXV. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--It is along time since I last wrote to you;
and a long distance in space and in fortune,--from the shores of
the Solway in summer 1865, to this niche of the Alps and
Mediterranean today, after what has befallen me in the interim.
A longer interval, I think, and surely by far a sadder, than ever
occurred between us before, since we first met in the Scotch
moors, some five and thirty years ago.  You have written me
various Notes, too, and Letters, all good and cheering to me,--
almost the only truly human speech I have heard from anybody
living;--and still my stony silence could not be broken;  not
till now, though often looking forward to it, could I resolve on
such a thing.  You will think me far gone, and much bankrupt in
hope and heart;--and indeed I am;  as good as without hope and
without fear;  a gloomily serious, silent, and sad old man;
gazing into the final chasm of things, in mute dialogue with
"Death, Judgment, and Eternity" (dialogue _mute_ on _both_
sides!), not caring to discourse with poor articulate-speaking
fellow creatures on their sorts of topics.  It is right of me;
and yet also it is not right.  I often feel that I had better be
dead than thus indifferent, contemptuous, disgusted with the
world and its roaring nonsense, which I have no thought farther
of lifting a finger to help, and only try to keep out of the way
of, and shut my door against.  But the truth is, I was nearly
killed by that hideous Book on Friedrich,--twelve years in
continuous wrestle with the nightmares and the subterranean
hydras;--nearly _killed,_ and had often thought I should be
altogether, and must die leaving the monster not so much as
finished!  This is one truth, not so evident to any friend or
onlooker as it is to myself:  and then there is another, known to
myself alone, as it were;  and of which I am best not to speak to
others, or to speak to them no farther.  By the calamity of April
last, I lost my little all in this world;  and have no soul left
who can make any corner of this world into a _home_ for me any
more.  Bright, heroic, tender, true and noble was that lost
treasure of my heart, who faithfully accompanied me in all the
rocky ways and climbings;  and I am forever poor without her.
She was snatched from me in a moment,--as by a death from the
gods.  Very beautiful her death was;  radiantly beautiful (to
those who understand it) had all her life been _quid plura?_  I
should be among the dullest and stupidest, if I were not among
the saddest of all men.  But not a word more on all this.

All summer last, my one solacement in the form of work was
writing, and sorting of old documents and recollections;
summoning out again into clearness old scenes that had now closed
on me without return.  Sad, and in a sense sacred;  it was like a
kind of _worship;_  the only _devout_ time I had had for a great
while past.  These things I have half or wholly the intention to
burn out of the way before I myself die:--but such continues
still mainly my employment,--so many hours every forenoon;  what
I call the "work" of my day;--to me, if to no other, it is
useful;  to reduce matters to writing means that you shall know
them, see them in their origins and sequences, in their essential
lineaments, considerably better than you ever did before.  To set
about writing my own _Life_ would be no less than horrible to me;
and shall of a certainty never be done.  The common impious
vulgar of this earth, what has it to do with my life or me?  Let
dignified oblivion, silence, and the vacant azure of Eternity
swallow _me;_  for my share of it, that, verily, is the
handsomest, or one handsome way, of settling my poor account with
the _canaille_ of mankind extant and to come.  "Immortal glory,"
is not that a beautiful thing, in the Shakespeare Clubs and
Literary Gazettes of our improved Epoch?--I did not leave London,
except for fourteen days in August, to a fine and high old Lady-
friend's in Kent;  where, riding about the woods and by the sea-
beaches and chalk cliffs, in utter silence, I felt sadder than
ever, though a little less _miserably_ so, than in the intrusive
babblements of London, which I could not quite lock out of doors.
We read, at first, Tennyson's _Idyls,_ with profound recognition
of the finely elaborated execution, and also of the inward
perfection of _vacancy,_--and, to say truth, with considerable
impatience at being treated so very like infants, though the
lollipops were so superlative.  We gladly changed for one
Emerson's _English Traits;_  and read that, with increasing and
ever increasing satisfaction every evening;  blessing Heaven that
there were still Books for grown-up people too!  That truly is a
Book all full of thoughts like winged arrows (thanks to the
Bowyer from us both):--my Lady-friend's name is Miss Davenport
Bromley;  it was at Wooton, in her Grandfather's House, in
Staffordshire, that Rousseau took shelter in 1760;  and one
hundred and six years later she was reading Emerson to me with a
recognition that would have pleased the man, had he seen it.

About that same time my health and humors being evidently so, the
Dowager Lady Ashburton (not the high Lady you saw, but a
Successor of Mackenzie-Highland type), who wanders mostly about
the Continent since her widowhood, for the sake of a child's
health, began pressing and inviting me to spend the blade months
of Winter here in her Villa with her;--all friends warmly
seconding and urging;  by one of whom I was at last snatched off,
as if by the hair of the head, (in spite of my violent No, no!)
on the eve of Christmas last, and have been here ever since,--
really with improved omens.  The place is beautiful as a very
picture, the climate superlative (today a sun and sky like very
June);  the _hospitality_ of usage beyond example.  It is likely
I shall be here another six weeks, or longer.  If you please to
write me, the address is on the margin; and I will answer.  Adieu.

T. Carlyle




CLXXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--It is near three years since I last wrote to you;
from Mentone, under the Ligurian Olive and Orange trees, and
their sombre foreign shadows, and still more sombre suggestings
and promptings;  the saddest, probably, of all living men.  That
you made no answer I know right well means only, "Alas, what can
I say to him of consolatory that he does not himself know!"  Far
from a fault, or perhaps even a mistake on your part;--nor have I
felt it otherwise.  Sure enough, among the lights that have gone
out for me, and are still going, one after one, under the
inexorable Decree, in this now dusky and lonely world, I count
with frequent regret that our Correspondence (not by absolute
hest of Fate) should have fallen extinct, or into such abeyance:
but I interpret it as you see;  and my love and brotherhood to
you remain alive, and will while I myself do.  Enough of this.
By lucky chance, as you perceive, you are again to get one
written Letter from me, and I a reply from you, before the final
Silence come.  The case is this.

For many years back, a thought, which I used to check again as
fond and silly, has been occasionally present to me,--Of
testifying my gratitude to New England (New England, acting
mainly through one of her Sons called Waldo Emerson), _by
bequeathing to it my poor Falstaf Regiment, latterly two Falstaf
Regiments of Books,_ those I purchased and used in writing
_Cromwell,_ and ditto those on _Friedrich the Great._  "This
could be done," I often said to myself;  "this _could_ perhaps;
and this would be a real satisfaction to me.  But who then
would march through Coventry with such a set!"  The extreme
insignificance of the Gift, this and nothing else, always gave
me pause.

Last Summer, I was lucky enough to meet with your friend C.E.
Norton, and renew many old Massachusetts recollections, in free
talk with [him]....;  to him I spoke of the affair;  candidly
describing it, especially the above questionable feature of it,
so far as I could;  and his answer, then, and more deliberately
afterwards, was so hopeful, hearty, and decisive, that--in effect
it has decided me;  and I am this day writing to him that such is
the poor fact, and that I need farther instructions on it so soon
as you two have taken counsel together.

To say more about the infinitesimally small value of the Books
would be superfluous:  nay, in truth, many or most of them are
not without intrinsic value, one or two are even excellent as
Books;  and all of them, it may perhaps be said, have a kind of
_symbolic_ or _biographic_ value;  and testify (a thing not
useless) _on what slender commissariat stores_ considerable
campaigns, twelve years long or so, may be carried on in this
world.  Perhaps you already knew of me, what the _Cromwell_ and
_Friedrich_ collection might itself intimate, that much _buying_
of Books was never a habit of mine,--far the reverse, even to
this day!

Well, my Friend, you will have a meeting with Norton so soon as
handy;  and let me know what is next to be done.  And that, in
your official capacity, is all I have to say to you at present.

Unofficially there were much,--much that is mournful, but perhaps
also something that is good and blessed, and though the saddest,
also the highest, the lovingest and best;  as beseems Time's
sunset, now coming nigh.  At present I will say only that, in
bodily health, I am not to be called Ill, for a man who will be
seventy-four next month;  nor, on the spiritual side, has
anything been laid upon me that is quite beyond my strength.
More miserable I have often been;  though as solitary, soft of
heart, and sad, of course never.

Publisher Chapman, when I question him whether you for certain
_get_ your Monthly Volume of what they call "The Library
Edition," assures me that "it is beyond doubt":--I confess I
should still like to be _better_ assured.  If all is _right,_ you
should, by the time this Letter arrives, be receiving or have
received your thirteenth Volume, last of the _Miscellanies._
Adieu, my Friend.

Ever truly yours,
T. Carlyle



CLXXVII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--A month ago or more I wrote, by the same post, to
you and to Norton about those Books for Harvard College;  and in
late days have been expecting your joint answer.  From Norton
yesternight I receive what is here copied for your perusal;  it
has come round by Florence as you see, and given me real pleasure
and instruction.  From you, who are possibly also away from home,
I have yet nothing;  but expect now soon to have a few words.
There did arrive, one evening lately, your two pretty _volumes_
of _Collected Works,_ a pleasant salutation from you--which set
me upon reading again what I thought I knew well before:--but the
Letter is still to come.

Norton's hints are such a complete instruction to me that I see
my way straight through the business, and might, by Note of
"Bequest" and memorandum for the Barings, finish it in half an
hour:  nevertheless I will wait for your Letter, and punctually
do nothing till your directions too are before me.  Pray write,
therefore;  all is lying ready here.  Since you heard last, I
have got two Catalogues made out, approximately correct;  one is
to lie here till the Bequest be executed;  the other I thought of
sending to you against the day?  This is my own invention in
regard to the affair since I wrote last.  Approve of it, and you
shall have your copy by Book-post at once.  "_Approximately_
correct";  absolutely I cannot get it to be.  But I need not
doubt the Pious Purpose will be piously and even sacredly
fulfilled;--and your Catalogue will be a kind of evidence that it
is.  Adieu, dear Emerson, till your Letter come.

Yours ever,
Thomas Carlyle




CLXXVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--'T is a sad apology that I have to offer for
delays which no apology can retrieve.  I received your first
letter with pure joy, but in the midst of extreme inefficiency.
I had suddenly yielded to a proposition of Fields & Co. to
manufacture a book for a given day.  The book was planned, and
going on passably, when it was found better to divide the matter,
and separate, and postpone the purely literary portion (criticism
chiefly), and therefore to modify and swell the elected part.
The attempt proved more difficult than I had believed, for I only
write by spasms, and these ever more rare,--and daemons that have
no ears.  Meantime the publication day was announced, and the
printer at the door.  Then came your letter in the shortening
days.  When I drudged to keep my word, _invita Minerva._

I could not write in my book, and I could not write a letter.
Tomorrow and many morrows made things worse, for we have
indifferent health in the house, and, as it chanced, unusual
strain of affairs,--which always come when they should not.  For
one thing--I have just sold a house which I once built opposite
my own.  But I will leave the bad month, which I hope will not
match itself in my lifetime.  Only 't is pathetic and remorseful
to me that any purpose of yours, especially, a purpose so
inspired, should find me imbecile.

Heartily I delight in your proposed disposition of the books.  It
has every charm of surprise, and nobleness, and large affection.
The act will deeply gratify a multitude of good men, who will see
in it your real sympathy with the welfare of the country.  I hate
that there should be a moment of delay in the completing of your
provisions,--and that I of all men should be the cause!  Norton's
letter is perfect on his part, and needs no addition, I believe,
from me.  You had not in your first letter named _Cambridge,_ and
I had been meditating that he would probably have divided your
attention between Harvard and the Boston Public Library,--now the
richest in the country, at first founded by the gifts of Joshua
Bates (of London), and since enriched by the city and private
donors, Theodore Parker among them.  But after conversation with
two or three friends, I had decided that Harvard College was the
right beneficiary, as being the mother real or adoptive of a
great number of your lovers and readers in America, and because a
College is a seat of sentiment and cosmical relations.  The
Library is outgrown by other libraries in the Country, counts
only 119,000 bound volumes in 1868;  the several departments of
Divinity, Law, Medicine, and Natural Science in the University
having special libraries, that together add some 40,000 more.
The College is newly active (with its new President Eliot, a
cousin of Norton's) and expansive in all directions.  And the
Library will be relieved through subscriptions now being
collected among the Alumni with the special purpose of securing
to it an adequate fund for annual increase.

I shall then write to Norton at once that I concur with him in
the destination of the books to Harvard College, and approve
entirely his advices in regard to details.  And so soon as you
send me the Catalogue I shall, if you permit, communicate your
design to President Eliot and the Corporation.

One thing I shall add to the Catalogue now or later (perhaps only
by bequest), your own prized gift to me, in 1848, of Wood's
_Athenae Oxonienses,_ which I have lately had rebound, and in
which every pen and pencil mark of yours is notable.

The stately books of the New Edition have duly come from the
unforgetting friend.  I have _Sartor, Schiller, French
Revolution,_ 3 vols., _Miscellanies,_ Numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,--ten
volumes in all, excellently printed and dressed, and full of
memories and electricity.

I have much to say, but of things not opportune at this moment,
and in spite of my long contumacy dare believe that I shall
quickly write again my proper letter to my friend, whose every
word I watchfully read and remember.




CLXXIX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Three days ago I at last received your Letter;
with very great pleasure and thankfulness, as you may suppose.
Indeed, it is quite strangely interesting to see face to face my
old Emerson again, not a feature of him changed, whom I have
known all the best part of my life.

I am very glad, withal, to find that you agree completely with
Norton and myself in regard to that small Harvard matter.

This is not Chelsea, as you perceive, this is a hospitable
mansion in Hampshire;  but I expect to be in Chelsea within about
a week;  once there, I shall immediately despatch to you one of
the three Catalogues I have, with a more deliberate letter than I
at present have the means of writing or dictating.

Yours ever truly,
T. Carlyle




CLXXX. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--At length I have got home from those sumptuous
tumults ("Melchet Court" is the Dowager Lady Ashburton's House,
whose late Husband, an estimable friend of mine, and _half
American,_ you may remember here);  and I devote to ending of our
small Harvard Business, small enough, but true and kindly,--the
first quiet hour I have.

Your Copy of the Catalogue, which accompanies by Book-Post of
today, is the correctest I could manage to get done;  all the
Books mentioned in it I believe to be now here (and indeed,
except five or six _tiny_ articles, have _seen_ them all, in one
or other of the three rooms where my Books now stand, and where I
believe the insignificant trifle of "tinies" to be):  all these I
can expect will be punctually attended to when the time comes,
and proceeded with according to Norton's scheme and yours;--and
if any more "tinies," which I could not even remember, should
turn up (which I hardly think there will), these also will
_class_ themselves (as _Cromwelliana_ or _Fredericana_), and be
faith fully sent on with the others.  For benefit of my
_Survivors_ and _Representatives_ here, I retain an exact
_Copy_ of the Catalogue now put into your keeping;  so that
everything may fall out square between them and you when the
Time shall arrive.

I mean to conform in every particular to the plan sketched out by
Norton and you,--unless, in your next Letter, you have something
other or farther to advise:--and so soon as I hear from you that
Harvard accepts my poor widow's mite of a _Bequest,_ I will
proceed to put it down in due form, and so finish this small
matter, which for long years has hovered in my thoughts as a
thing I should like to do.  And so enough for this time.

I meant to write a longish Letter, touching on many other
points,--though you see I am reduced to _pencil,_ and "write"
with such difficulty (never yet could learn to "dictate," though
my little Niece here is promptitude itself, and is so swift and
legible,--useful here as a cheerful rushlight in this now sombre
element, sombre, sad, but also beautiful and tenderly solemn more
and more, in which she bears me company, good little "Mary"!).
But, in bar of all such purposes, Publisher Chapman has come in,
with Cromwell Engravings and their hindrances, with money
accounts, &c., &c.;  and has not even left me a moment of time,
were nothing else needed!

Vol. XIV. (_Cromwell,_ I.) ought to be at Concord about as soon
as this.  In our Newspapers I notice your Book announced, "half
of the Essays new,"--which I hope to get _quam primum,_ and
illuminate some evenings with,--_so_ as nothing else can, in my
present common mood.

Adieu, dear old Friend.  I am and remain yours always,

T. Carlyle




CLXXXI. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--On receiving your letter and catalogue I wrote
out a little history of the benefaction and carried it last
Tuesday to President Eliot at Cambridge, who was heartily
gratified, and saw everything rightly, and expressed an anxiety
(most becoming in my eyes after my odious shortcomings) that
there should be no moment of delay on our part.  "The Corporation
would not meet again for a fortnight:--but he would not wait,--
would call a special meeting this week to make the communication
to them."  He did so:  the meeting was held on Saturday and I
have received this (Monday) morning from him enclosed letter
and record.

It is very amiable and noble in you to have kept this surprise
for us in your older days.  Did you mean to show us that you
could not be old, but immortally young? and having kept us all
murmuring at your satires and sharp homilies, will now melt us
with this manly and heart-warming embrace?  Nobody could predict
and none could better it.  And you shall even go your own gait
henceforward with a blessing from us all, and a trust exceptional
and unique.  I do not longer hesitate to talk to such good men as
I see of this gift, and it has in every ear a gladdening effect.
People like to see character in a gift, and from rare character
the gift is more precious.  I wish it may be twice blest in
continuing to give you the comfort it will give us.

I think I must mend myself by reclaiming my old right to send you
letters.  I doubt not I shall have much to tell you, could I
overcome the hesitation to attempt a reasonable letter when one
is driven to write so many sheets of mere routine as sixty-six
(nearly sixty-seven) years enforce.  I shall have to prate of my
daughters;--Edith Forbes, with her two children at Milton;  Ellen
Emerson at home, herself a godsend to this house day by day;  and
my son Edward studying medicine in Boston,--whom I have ever
meant and still mean to send that he may see your face when that
professional curriculum winds up.

I manage to read a few books and look into more.  Herman Grimm
sent me lately a good one, Goethe's _Unterhaltungen_ with
Muller,--which set me on Varnhagen and others.  My wife sends old
regards, and her joy in this occasion.

Yours ever,
R.W. Emerson

P.S.  Mr. Eliot took my rough counting of Volumes as correct.
When he sends me back the catalogue, I will make it exact.--I
sent you last week a little book by book-post.




CLXXXII. Carlyle to Emerson

My Dear Emerson,--The day before yesterday, I heard incidentally
of an unfortunate Mail Steamer, bound for America, which had lost
its screw or some essential part of it;  and so had, instead of
carrying its Letters forward to America, been drifting about like
a helpless log on the shores of Ireland till some three days ago,
when its Letters and Passengers were taken out, and actually
forwarded, thither.  By industrious calculation, it appears
probable to us here that my Letter to you may have been tumbling
about in that helpless Steamer, instead of getting to Concord;
where, if so, said Letter cannot now arrive till the lingering of
it have created some astonishment there.

I hastily write this, however, to say that a Letter was duly
forwarded a few days after yours [of January 23] arrived,--
enclosing the _Harvard Catalogue,_ with all necessary _et
ceteras;_  indorsing all your proposals;  and signifying that the
matter should be authentically completed the instant I should
hear from you again.  I may add now that the thing is essentially
completed,--all signed and put on paper, or all but a word
or two, which, for form's sake, waits the actual arrival of
your Letter.

I have never yet received your Book;  and, if it linger only a
few days more, mean to provide myself with a copy such as the
Sampson and Low people have on sale everywhere.

I had from Norton, the other day, a very kind and friendly Letter.

This is all of essential that I had to say.  I write in utmost
haste.  But am always, dear Emerson,

Yours sincerely,
            T. Carlyle




CLXXXIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--The day before yesterday your welcome Letter came
to hand, with the welcome news in it;  yesterday I put into my
poor Document here the few words still needed;  locked everything
into its still repository (your Letter, President Eliot's,
Norton's, &c., &c.);  and walked out into the sunshine, piously
thankful that a poor little whim, which had long lain fondly in
my heart, had realized itself with an emphasis I could never
hope, and was become (thanks to generous enthusiasm on New
England's part) a beautiful little fact, lying done there, so far
as I had to do with it.  Truly your account of matters threw a
glow of _life_ into my thoughts which is very rare there now;
altogether a gratifying little Transaction to me,--and I must add
a surprising, for the enthusiasm of good-will is evidently great,
and the occasion is almost infinitesimally small!  Well, well;
it is all finished off and completed,--(you can tell Mr. Eliot,
with many thanks from me, that I did introduce the proper style,
"President and Fellows," &c., and have forgotten nothing of what
he said, or of what he _did_);--and so we will say only, _Faustum
sit,_ as our last word on the subject;--and to me it will be, for
some days yet, under these vernal skies, something that is itself
connected with THE SPRING in a still higher sense;  a little
white and red-lipped bit of _Daisy_ pure and poor, scattered into
TIME's Seedfield, and struggling above ground there, uttering
_its_ bit of prophecy withal, among the ox-hoofs and big jungles
that are everywhere about and not prophetic of much!--

One thing only I regret, that you _have_ spoken of the affair!
For God's sake don't;  and those kindly people to whom you have,-
-swear them to silence for love of me!  The poor little
_Daisy_kin will get into the Newspapers, and become the nastiest
of Cabbages:--silence, silence, I beg of you to the utmost
stretch of your power!  Or is the case already irremediable?  I
will hope not.  Talk about such things, especially Penny Editor's
talk, is like vile coal-smoke filling your poor little world;
silence alone is azure, and has a _sky_ to it.--But, enough now.

The "little Book" never came;  and, I doubt, never will:  it is a
fate that seems to await three fourths of the Books that attempt
to reach me by the American Post;  owing to some _informality in
wrapping_ (I have heard);--it never gave me any notable _regret_
till now.  However, I had already bought myself an English copy,
rather gaudy little volume (probably intended for the _railways,_
as if _it_ were a Book to be read there), but perfectly printed,
ready to be read anywhere by the open eye and earnest mind;--
which I read here, accordingly, with great attention, clear
assent for most part, and admiring recognition.  It seems to me
you are all your old self here, and something _more._  A calm
insight, piercing to the very centre;  a beautiful sympathy, a
beautiful _epic_ humor;  a soul peaceably irrefragable in this
loud-jangling world, of which it sees the ugliness, but _notices_
only the huge new _opulences_ (still so anarchic);  knows the
electric telegraph, with all its vulgar botherations and
impertinences, accurately for what it is, and ditto ditto the
oldest eternal Theologies of men.  All this belongs to the
Highest Class of thought (you may depend upon it);  and again
seemed to me as, in several respects, the one perfectly Human
Voice I had heard among my fellow-creatures for a long time.  And
then the "style," the treatment and expression,--yes, it is
inimitable, best--Emersonian throughout.  Such brevity,
simplicity, softness, homely grace;  with such a penetrating
meaning, _soft_ enough, but irresistible, going down to the
depths and up to the heights, as _silent electricity_ goes.  You
have done _very well;_  and many will know it ever better by
degrees.--Only one thing farther I will note:  How you go as if
altogether on the "Over-Soul," the Ideal, the Perfect or
Universal and Eternal in this life of ours;  and take so little
heed of the frightful quantities of _friction_ and perverse
impediment there everywhere are;  the reflections upon which in
my own poor life made me now and then very sad, as I read you.
Ah me, ah me;  what a vista it is, mournful, beautiful,
_unfathomable_ as Eternity itself, these last fifty years of Time
to me.--

Let me not forget to thank you for that _fourth_ page of your
Note;  I should say it was almost the most interesting of all.
News from yourself at first hand;  a momentary glimpse into the
actual Household at Concord, face to face, as in years of old!
True, I get vague news of you from time to time;  but what are
these in comparison?--If you _will,_ at the eleventh hour, turn
over a new leaf, and write me Letters again,--but I doubt _you
won't._  And yet were it not worth while, think you? [Greek]--
will be here _anon._--My kindest regards to your wife.  Adieu, my
ever-kind Old Friend.

Yours faithfully always,
T. Carlyle




CLXXXIV. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--Two unanswered letters filled and fragrant and
potent with goodness will not let me procrastinate another
minute, or I shall sink and deserve to sink into my dormouse
condition.  You are of the Anakim, and know nothing of the
debility and postponement of the blonde constitution.  Well,
if you shame us by your reservoir inexhaustible of force,
you indemnify and cheer some of us, or one of us, by charges
of electricity.

Your letter of April came, as ever-more than ever, if possible--
full of kindness, and making much of our small doings and
writings, and seemed to drive me to instant acknowledgment;  but
the oppressive engagement of writing and reading eighteen
lectures on Philosophy to a class of graduates in the College,
and these in six successive weeks, was a task a little more
formidable in prospect and in practice than any foregoing one.
Of course, it made me a prisoner, took away all rights of
friendship, honor, and justice, and held me to such frantic
devotion to my work as must spoil that also.

Well, it is now ended, and has no shining side but this one, that
materials are collected and a possibility shown me how a
repetition of the course next year--which is appointed--will
enable me partly out of these materials, and partly by large
rejection of these, and by large addition to them, to construct a
fair report of what I have read and thought on the subject.  I
doubt the experts in Philosophy will not praise my discourses;--
but the topics give me room for my guesses, criticism,
admirations and experiences with the accepted masters, and also
the lessons I have learned from the hidden great.  I have the
fancy that a realist is a good corrector of formalism, no matter
how incapable of syllogism or continuous linked statement.  To
great results of thought and morals the steps are not many, and
it is not the masters who spin the ostentatious continuity.

I am glad to hear that the last sent book from me arrived safely.
You were too tender and generous in your first notice of it, I
fear.  But with whatever deductions for your partiality, I know
well the unique value of Carlyle's praise.  Many things crowd to
be said on this little paper.  Though I could see no harm in the
making known the bequest of books to Cambridge,--no harm, but
sincere pleasure, and honor of the donor from all good men,--yet
on receipt of your letter touching that, I went back to President
Eliot, and told him your opinion on newspapers.  He said it was
necessarily communicated to the seven persons composing the
Corporation, but otherwise he had been very cautious, and it
would not go into print.

You are sending me a book, and Chapman's Homer it is?  Are you
bound by your Arabian bounty to a largess whenever you think of
your friend?  And you decry the book too.  'T-is long since I
read it, or in it, but the apotheosis of Homer, in the dedication
to Prince Henry, "Thousands of years attending," &c., is one of
my lasting inspirations.  The book has not arrived yet, as the
letter always travels faster, but shall be watched and received
and announced.

But since you are all bounty and care for me, where are the new
volumes of the Library Edition of Carlyle?  I received duly, as I
wrote you in a former letter, nine Volumes,--_Sartor;  Life of
Schiller;_  five Vols. of _Miscellanies;  French Revolution;_
these books oddly addressed to my name, but at _Cincinnati,_
Massachusetts.  Whether they went to Ohio, and came back to
Boston, I know not.  Two volumes came later, duplicates of two
already received, and were returned at my request by Fields & Co.
with an explanation.  But no following volume has come.  I write
all this because you said in one letter that Mr. Chapman assured
you that every month a book was despatched to my address.

But what do I read in our Boston Newspapers twice in the last
three days?  That "Thomas Carlyle is coming to America," and the
tidings cordially greeted by the editors;  though I had just
received your letter silent to any such point.  Make that story
true, though it had never a verisimilitude since thirty odd years
ago, and you shall make many souls happy and perhaps show you so
many needs and opportunities for beneficent power that you cannot
be allowed to grow old or withdraw.  Was I not once promised a
visit?  This house entreats you earnestly and lovingly to come
and dwell in it.  My wife and Ellen and Edward E. are thoroughly
acquainted with your greatness and your loveliness.  And it is
but ten days of healthy sea to pass.

So wishes heartily and affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




CLXXXV. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Your Letter, dated 15 June, never got to me till
about ten days ago;  when my little Niece and I returned out of
Scotland, and a long, rather empty Visit there!  It had missed me
here only by two or three days;  and my highly _in_felicitous
Selectress of Letters to be forwarded had left _it_ carefully
aside as undeserving that honor,--good faithful old Woman, one
hopes she is greatly stronger on some sides than in this
literary-selective one.  Certainly no Letter was forwarded that
had the hundredth part of the right to be so;  certainly, of all
the Letters that came to me, or were left waiting here, this was,
in comparison, the one which might _not_ with propriety have been
left to lie stranded forever, or to wander on the winds forever!--

One of my first journeys was to Chapman, with vehement _rebuke_
of this inconceivable "Cincinnati-Massachusetts" business.
_Stupiditas stupiditatum;_  I never in my life, not even in that
unpunctual House, fell in with anything that equaled it.  Instant
amendment was at once undertaken for, nay it seems had been
already in part performed:  "Ten volumes, following the nine you
already had, were despatched in Field & Co.'s box above two
months ago," so Chapman solemnly said and asseverated to me;  so
that by this time you ought actually to have in hand nineteen
volumes;  and the twentieth (first of _Friedrich_), which came
out ten days ago, is to go in Field & Co.'s Box this week, and
ought, not many days after the arrival of this Letter, to be in
Boston waiting for you there.  The _Chapman's Homer_ (two
volumes) had gone with that first Field Packet;  and would be
handed to you along with the ten volumes which were overdue.  All
this was solemnly declared to me as on Affidavit;  Chapman also
took extract of the Massachusetts passage in your Letter, in
order to pour it like ice-cold water on the head of his stupid
old Chief-Clerk, the instant the poor creature got back from his
rustication:  alas, I am by no means certain that it will make a
new man of him, nor, in fact, that the whole of this amendatory
programme will get itself performed to equal satisfaction!  But
you must write to me at once if it is not so;  and done it shall
be in spite of human stupidity itself.  Note, withal, these
things:  Chapman sends no Books to America _except_ through Field
& Co.;  he does not regularly send a Box at the middle of the
month;  but he does "almost monthly send one Bog";  so that if
your monthly Volume do not start from London about the 15th, it
is due by the very _next_ Chapman-Field box;  and if it at any
time don't come, I beg of you very much to make instant complaint
through Field & Co., or what would be still more effectual,
direct to myself.  My malison on all Blockheadisms and torpid
stupidities and infidelities;  of which this world is full!--

Your Letter had been anxiously enough waited for, a month before
my departure;  but we will not mention the delay in presence of
what you were engaged with then.  _Faustum sit;_  that truly was
and will be a Work worth doing your best upon;  and I, if alive,
can promise you at least one reader that will do his best upon
your Work.  I myself, often think of the Philosophies precisely
in that manner.  To say truth, they do not otherwise rise in
esteem with me at all, but rather sink.  The last thing I read of
that kind was a piece by Hegel, in an excellent Translation by
Stirling, right well translated, I could see, for every bit of it
was intelligible to me;  but my feeling at the end of it was,
"Good Heavens, I have walked this road before many a good time;
but never with a Cannon-ball at each ankle before!"  Science
also, Science falsely so called, is--But I will not enter upon
that with you just now.

The Visit to America, alas, alas, is pure Moonshine.  Never had
I, in late years, the least shadow of intention to undertake that
adventure;  and I am quite at a loss to understand how the rumor
originated.  One Boston Gentleman (a kind of universal
Undertaker, or Lion's Provider of Lecturers I think) informed me
that _"the Cable"_ had told him;  and I had to remark, "And who
the devil told the Cable?"  Alas, no, I fear I shall never dare
to undertake that big Voyage;  which has so much of romance and
of reality behind it to me;  _zu spat, zu spat._  I do sometimes
talk dreamily of a long Sea-Voyage, and the good the Sea has
often done me,--in times when good was still possible.  It may
have been some vague folly of that kind that originated this
rumor;  for rumors are like dandelion-seeds;  and _the Cable_ I
dare say welcomes them all that have a guinea in their pocket.

Thank you for blocking up that Harvard matter;  provided it don't
go into the Newspapers, all is right.  Thank you a thousand times
for that thrice-kind potential welcome, and flinging wide open
your doors and your hearts to me at Concord.  The gleam of it is
like sunshine in a subterranean place.  Ah me, Ah me!  May God be
with you all, dear Emerson.

Yours ever,
T. Carlyle




CLXXXVI. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I am the ignoblest of all men in my perpetual
short-comings to you.  There is no example of constancy like
yours, and it always stings my stupor into temporary recovery and
wonderful resolution to accept the noble challenge.  But "the
strong hours conquer us," and I am the victim of miscellany,--
miscellany of designs, vast debility, and procrastination.

Already many days before your letter came, Fields sent me a
package from you, which he said he had found a little late,
because they were covered up in a box of printed sheets of other
character, and this treasure was not at first discovered.  They
are,--_Life of Sterling;  Latter Day Pamphlets;  Past and
Present;  Heroes;_  5 Vols. _Cromwell's Letters and Speeches._
Unhappily, Vol. II. of _Cromwell_ is wanting, and there is a
duplicate of Vol. V. instead of it.  Now, two days ago came your
letter, and tells me that the good old gods have also inspired
you to send me Chapman's Homer! and that it came--heroes with
heroes--in the same enchanted box.  I went to Fields yesterday
and demanded the book.  He ignored all,--even to the books he had
already sent me;  called Osgood to council, and they agreed that
it must be that all these came in a bog of sheets of Dickens from
Chapman, which was sent to the Stereotypers at Cambridge;  and
the box shall be instantly explored.  We will see what tomorrow
shall find.  As to the duplicates, I will say here, that I have
received two:  first, the above-mentioned Vol. II. of _Cromwell;_
and, second, long before, a second copy of _Sartor Resartus,_
apparently instead of the Vol. I. of the _French Revolution,_
which did not come.  I proposed to Fields to send back to Chapman
these two duplicates.  But he said, "No, it will cost as much as
the price of the books."  I shall try to find in New York who
represents Chapman and sells these books, and put them to his
credit there, in exchange for the volumes I lack.  Meantime, my
serious thanks for all these treasures go to you,--steadily good
to my youth and my age.

Your letter was most welcome, and most in that I thought I read,
in what you say of not making the long-promised visit hither, a
little willingness to come.  Think again, I pray you, of that
Ocean Voyage, which is probably the best medicine and restorative
which remains to us at your age and mine.  Nine or ten days will
bring you (and commonly with unexpected comfort and easements on
the way) to Boston.  Every reading person in America holds you in
exceptional regard, and will rejoice in your arrival.  They have
forgotten your scarlet sins before or during the war.  I have
long ceased to apologize for or explain your savage sayings about
American or other republics or publics, and am willing that
anointed men bearing with them authentic charters shall be laws
to themselves as Plato willed.  Genius is but a large infusion of
Deity, and so brings a prerogative all its own.  It has a right
and duty to affront and amaze men by carrying out its perceptions
defiantly, knowing well that time and fate will verify and
explain what time and fate have through them said.  We must not
suggest to Michel Angelo, or Machiavel, or Rabelais, or Voltaire,
or John Brown of Osawatomie (a great man), or Carlyle, how they
shall suppress their paradoxes and check their huge gait to keep
accurate step with the procession on the street sidewalk.  They
are privileged persons, and may have their own swing for me.

I did not mean to chatter so much, but I wish you would come out
hither and read our possibilities now being daily disclosed, and
our actualities which are not nothing.  I shall like to show you
my near neighbors, topographically or practically.  A near
neighbor and friend, E. Rockwood Hoar, whom you saw in his youth,
is now an inestimable citizen in this State, and lately, in
President Grant's Cabinet, Attorney-General of the United States.
He lives in this town and carries it in his hand.  Another is
John M. Forbes, a strictly private citizen, of great executive
ability, and noblest affections, a motive power and regulator
essential to our City, refusing all office, but impossible to
spare;  and these are men whom to name the voice breaks and the
eye is wet.  A multitude of young men are growing up here of high
promise, and I compare gladly the social poverty of my youth with
the power on which these draw.  The Lowell race, again, in our
War yielded three or four martyrs so able and tender and true,
that James Russell Lowell cannot allude to them in verse or prose
but the public is melted anew.  Well, all these know you well,
have read and will read you, yes, and will prize and use your
benefaction to the College;  and I believe it would add hope,
health, and strength to you to come and see them.

In my much writing I believe I have left the chief things unsaid.
But come!  I and my house wait for you.

Affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




CLXXXVIa. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Friend,--I fear there is no pardon from you, none from
myself, for this immense new gap in our correspondence.  Yet no
hour came from month to month to write a letter, since whatever
deliverance I got from one web in the last year served only to
throw me into another web as pitiless.  Yet what gossamer these
tasks of mine must appear to your might!  Believe that the
American climate is unmanning, or that one American whom you know
is severely taxed by Lilliput labors.  The last hot summer
enfeebled me till my young people coaxed me to go with Edward to
the White Hills, and we climbed or were dragged up Agiocochook,
in August, and its sleet and snowy air nerved me again for the
time.  But the booksellers, whom I had long ago urged to reprint
Plutarch's _Morals,_ claimed some forgotten promise, and set me
on reading the old patriarch again, and writing a few pages about
him, which no doubt cost me as much time and pottering as it
would cost you to write a History.  Then an "Oration" was due to
the New England Society in New York, on the 250th anniversary of
the Plymouth Landing,--as I thought myself familiar with the
story, and holding also some opinions thereupon.  But in the
Libraries I found alcoves full of books and documents reckoned
essential;  and, at New York, after reading for an hour to the
great assembly out of my massy manuscript, I refused to print a
line until I could revise and complete my papers;--risking, of
course, the nonsense of their newspaper reporters.  This pill
swallowed and forgotten, it was already time for my Second
"Course on Philosophy" at Cambridge,--which I had accepted again
that I might repair the faults of the last year.  But here were
eighteen lectures, each to be read sixteen miles away from my
house, to go and come,--and the same work and journey twice in
each week,--and I have just got through the doleful ordeal.

I have abundance of good readings and some honest writing on the
leading topics,--but in haste and confusion they are misplaced
and spoiled.  I hope the ruin of no young man's soul will here or
hereafter be charged to me as having wasted his time or
confounded his reason.

Now I come to the raid of a London bookseller, Hotten, (of whom I
believe I never told you,) on my forgotten papers in the old
_Dials,_ and other pamphlets here.  Conway wrote me that he could
not be resisted,--would certainly steal good and bad,--but might
be guided in the selection.  I replied that the act was odious to
me, and I promised to denounce the man and his theft to any
friends I might have in England;  but if, instead of printing
then, he would wait a year, I would make my own selection, with
the addition of some later critical papers, and permit the book.
Mr. Ireland in Manchester, and Conway in London, took the affair
kindly in hand, and Hotten acceded to my change.  And that is the
next task that threatens my imbecility.  But now, ten days ago or
less, my friend John M. Forbes has come to me with a proposition
to carry me off to California, the Yosemite, the Mammoth trees,
and the Pacific, and, after much resistance, I have surrendered
for six weeks, and we set out tomorrow.  And hence this sheet of
confession,--that I may not drag a lengthening chain.  Meantime,
you have been monthly loading me with good for evil.  I have just
counted twenty-three volumes of Carlyle's Library Edition, in
order on my shelves, besides two, or perhaps three, which Ellery
Channing has borrowed.  Add, that the precious Chapman's _Homer_
came safely, though not till months after you had told me of its
departure, and shall be guarded henceforward with joy.

_Wednesday, 13, Chicago._--Arrived here and can bring this little
sheet to the post-office here.  My daughter Edith Forbes, and
her husband William H. Forbes, and three other friends, accompany me,
and we shall overtake Mr. Forbes senior tomorrow at Burlington, Iowa.

The widow of one of the noblest of our young martyrs in the War,
Col. Lowell, cousin [nephew] of James Russell Lowell, sends me
word that she wishes me to give her a note of introduction to
you, confiding to me that she has once written a letter to you
which procured her the happiest reply from you, and I shall obey
her, and you will see her and own her rights.  Still continue to
be magnanimous to your friend,

R.W. Emerson




CLXXXVII. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--Your Letter gave me great pleasure.  A gleam of
sunshine after a long tract of lowering weather.  It is not you
that are to blame for this sad gap in our correspondence;  it is
I, or rather it is my misfortunes, and miserable inabilities,
broken resolutions, etc., etc.  The truth is, the winter here was
very unfriendly to me;  broke ruinously into my sleep;  and
through that into every other department of my businesses,
spiritual and temporal;  so that from about New-Year's Day last I
have been, in a manner, good for nothing,--nor am yet, though I
do again feel as if the beautiful Summer weather might perhaps do
something for me.  This it was that choked every enterprise;  and
postponed your Letter, week after week, through so many months.
Let us not speak of it farther!

Note, meanwhile, I have no disease about me;  nothing but the
gradual decay of any poor digestive faculty I latterly had,--or
indeed ever had since I was three and twenty years of age.  Let
us be quiet with it;  accept it as a mode of exit, of which
always there must be _some_ mode.

I have got done with all my press-correctings, editionings, and
paltry bother of that kind:  Vol. 30 will embark for you about
the middle of this month;  there are then to follow ("uniform,"
as the printers call it, though in smaller type) a little volume
called _General Index;_  and three more volumes of _Translations
from the German;_  after which we two will reckon and count;  and
if there is any _lacuna_ on the Concord shelf, at once make it
good.  Enough, enough on that score.

The Hotten who has got hold of you here is a dirty little pirate,
who snatches at everybody grown fat enough to yield him a bite
(paltry, unhanged creature);  so that in fact he is a symbol to
you of your visible rise in the world here;  and, with Conway's
vigilance to help, will do you good and not evil.  Glad am I, in
any case, to see so much new spiritual produce still ripening
around you;  and you ought to be glad, too.  Pray Heaven you may
long _keep your right hand_ steady:  you, too, I can perceive,
will never, any more than myself, learn to "write by dictation"
in a manner that will be supportable to you.  I rejoice, also, to
hear of such a magnificent adventure as that you are now upon.
Climbing the backbone of America;  looking into the Pacific Ocean
too, and the gigantic wonders going on there.  I fear you won't
see Brigham Young, however?  He also to me is one of the products
out there;--and indeed I may confess to you that the doings in
that region are not only of a big character, but of a great;--and
that in my occasional explosions against "Anarchy," and my
inextinguishable hatred of _it,_ I privately whisper to myself,
"Could any Friedrich Wilhelm, now, or Friedrich, or most perfect
Governor you could hope to realize, guide forward what is
America's essential task at present faster or more completely
than 'anarchic America' herself is now doing?"  _Such_ "Anarchy"
has a great deal to say for itself,--(would to Heaven ours of
England had as much!)--and points towards grand _anti_-Anarchies
in the future;  in fact, I can already discern in it huge
quantities of Anti-Anarchy in the "impalpable-powder" condition;
and hope, with the aid of centuries, immense things from it, in
my private mind!

Good Mrs. --- has never yet made her appearance;  but shall be
welcome whenever she does.

Did you ever hear the name of an aged, or elderly, fantastic
fellow-citizen of yours, called J. Lee Bliss, who designates
himself O.F. and A.K., i.e. "Old Fogey" and "Amiable Kuss"?  He
sent me, the other night, a wonderful miscellany of symbolical
shreds and patches;  which considerably amused me;  and withal
indicated good-will on the man's part;  who is not without humor,
in sight, and serious intention or disposition.  If you ever did
hear of him, say a word on the subject next time you write.

And above all things _write._  The instant you get home from
California, or see this, let me hear from you what your
adventures have been and what the next are to be.  Adieu,
dear Emerson.

Yours ever affectionately,
T. Carlyle

Mrs. --- sends a note from Piccadilly this new morning (June 5th);
_call_ to be made there today by Niece Mary, card left, etc.,
etc.   Promises to be an agreeable Lady.

Did you ever hear of such a thing as this suicidal Finis of the
French "Copper Captaincy";  gratuitous Attack on Germany, and
ditto Blowing-up of Paris by its own hand!  An event with
meanings unspeakable,--deep as the. _Abyss._--

If you ever write to C. Norton in Italy, send him my kind
remembrances.

--T. C.  (with about the velocity of Engraving--on lead!)



CLXXXVIII. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--'T is more than time that you should hear from
me whose debts to you always accumulate.  But my long journey to
California ended in many distractions on my return home.  I found
Varioloid in my house... and I was not permitted to enter it for
many days, and could only talk with wife, son, and daughter from
the yard.... I had crowded and closed my Cambridge lectures in
haste, and went to the land of Flowers invited by John M. Forbes,
one of my most valued friends, father of my daughter Edith's
husband.  With him and his family and one or two chosen guests,
the trip was made under the best conditions of safety, comfort,
and company, I measuring for the first time one entire line of
the Country.

California surprises with a geography, climate, vegetation,
beasts, birds, fishes even, unlike ours;  the land immense;  the
Pacific sea;  Steam brings the near neighborhood of Asia;  and
South America at your feet;  the mountains reaching the altitude
of Mont Blanc;  the State in its six hundred miles of latitude
producing all our Northern fruits, and also the fig, orange, and
banana.  But the climate chiefly surprised me.  The Almanac said
April;  but the day said June;--and day after day for six weeks
uninterrupted sunshine.  November and December are the rainy
months.  The whole Country, was covered with flowers, and all of
them unknown to us except in greenhouses.  Every bird that I know
at home is represented here, but in gayer plumes.

On the plains we saw multitudes of antelopes, hares, gophers,--
even elks, and one pair of wolves on the plains;  the grizzly
bear only in a cage.  We crossed one region of the buffalo, but
only saw one captive.  We found Indians at every railroad
station,--the squaws and papooses begging, and the "bucks," as
they wickedly call them, lounging.  On our way out, we left the
Pacific Railroad for twenty-four hours to visit Salt Lake;
called on Brigham Young--just seventy years old--who received us
with quiet uncommitting courtesy, at first,--a strong-built,
self-possessed, sufficient man with plain manners.  He took early
occasion to remark that "the one-man-power really meant all-
men's-power."  Our interview was peaceable enough, and rather
mended my impression of the man;  and, after our visit, I read in
the Descret newspaper his Speech to his people on the previous
Sunday.  It avoided religion, but was full of Franklinian good
sense.  In one point, he says:  "Your fear of the Indians is
nonsense.  The Indians like the white men's food.  Feed them
well, and they will surely die."  He is clearly a sufficient
ruler, and perhaps civilizer of his kingdom of blockheads ad
interim;  but I found that the San Franciscans believe that this
exceptional power cannot survive Brigham.

I have been surprised--but it is months ago--by a letter from
Lacy Garbett, the Architect, whom I do not know, but one of whose
books, about "Design in Architecture," I have always valued.
This letter, asking of me that Americans shall join Englishmen in
a Petition to Parliament against pulling down Ancient Saxon
buildings, is written in a way so wild as to suggest insanity,
and I have not known how to answer it.  At my "Saturday Club" in
Boston I sat at dinner by an English lord,--whose name I have
forgotten,--from whom I tried to learn what laws Parliament had
passed for the repairs of old religious Foundations, that could
make them the victims of covetous Architects.  But he assured me
there were none such, and that he himself was President of a
Society in his own County for the protection of such buildings.
So that I am left entirely in the dark in regard to the fact
and Garbett's letter.  He claims to speak both for Ruskin
and himself.

I grieve to hear no better account of your health than your last
letter gives.  The only contradiction of it, namely, the power of
your pen in this reproduction of thirty books,--and such books,--
is very important and very consoling to me.  A great work to be
done is the best insurance, and I sleep quietly, notwithstanding
these sad bulletins,--believing that you cannot be spared.

Fare well, dear friend,
R.W. Emerson




CLXXXIX. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I hope you will have returned safely from the
Orkneys in time to let my son Edward W.E. see your face on his
way through London to Germany, whither he goes to finish his
medical studies,--no, not finish, but prosecute.  Give him your
blessing, and tell him what he should look for in his few days in
London, and what in your Prussia.  He is a good youth, and we can
spare him only for this necessity.  I should like well to
accompany him as far as to your hearthstone, if only so I could
persuade you that it is but a ten-days ride for you thence to
mine,--a little farther than the Orkneys, and the outskirts of
land as good, and bigger.  I read gladly in your letters some
relentings toward America,--deeper ones in your dealing with
Harvard College;  and I know you could not see without interest
the immense and varied blossoming of our possibilities here,--of
all nationalities, too, besides our own.  I have heard from Mrs.
--- twice lately, who exults in your kindness to her.

Always affectionately, Yours,
R.W. Emerson




CXC. Emerson to Carlyle

My Dear Carlyle,--I received from you through Mr. Chapman, just
before Christmas, the last rich instalment of your Library
Edition;  viz. Vols. IV.-X. _Life of Friedrich;_  Vols. L-III.
_Translations from German;_  one volume General Index;  eleven
volumes in all,--and now my stately collection is perfect.
Perfect too is your Victory.  But I clatter my chains with joy,
as I did forty years ago, at your earliest gifts.  Happy man you
should be, to whom the Heaven has allowed such masterly
completion.  You shall wear your crown at the Pan-Saxon Games
with no equal or approaching competitor in sight,--well earned by
genius and exhaustive labor, and with nations for your pupils and
praisers.  I count it my eminent happiness to have been so nearly
your contemporary, and your friend,--permitted to detect by its
rare light the new star almost before the Easterners had seen it,
and to have found no disappointment, but joyful confirmation
rather, in coming close to its orb.  Rest, rest, now for a time;
I pray you, and be thankful.  Meantime, I know well all your
perversities, and give them a wide berth.  They seriously annoy a
great many worthy readers, nations of readers sometimes,--but I
heap them all as style, and read them as I read Rabelais's
gigantic humors which astonish in order to force attention, and
by and by are seen to be the rhetoric of a highly virtuous
gentleman who _swears._  I have been quite too busy with fast
succeeding _jobs_ (I may well call them), in the last year, to
have read much in these proud books;  but I begin to see daylight
coming through my fogs, and I have not lost in the least my
appetite for reading,--resolve, with my old Harvard professor,
"to retire and read the Authors."

I am impatient to deserve your grand Volumes by reading in them
with all the haughty airs that belong to seventy years which I
shall count if I live till May, 1873.  Meantime I see well that
you have lost none of your power, and I wish that you would let
in some good Eckermann to dine with you day by day, and competent
to report your opinions,--for you can speak as well as you can
write, and what the world to come should know...

Affectionately,
R.W. Emerson




CXCI. Carlyle to Emerson

Dear Emerson,--I am covered with confusion, astonishment, and
shame to think of my long silence.  You wrote me two beautiful
letters;  none friendlier, brighter, wiser could come to me from
any quarter of the world;  and I have not answered even by a
sign.  Promptly and punctually my poor heart did answer;  but to
do it outwardly,--as if there had lain some enchantment on me,--
was beyond my power.  The one thing I can say in excuse or
explanation is, that ever since Summer last, I have been in an
unusually dyspeptic, peaking, pining, and dispirited condition;
and have no right hand of my own for writing, nor, for several
months, had any other that was altogether agreeable to me.  But
in fine I don't believe you lay any blame or anger on me at all;
and I will say no more about it, but only try to repent and do
better next time.

Your letter from the Far West was charmingly vivid and free;  one
seemed to attend you personally, and see with one's own eyes the
_notabilia,_ human and other, of those huge regions, in your
swift flight through them to and from.  I retain your little
etching of Brigham Young as a bit of real likeness;  I have often
thought of your transit through Chicago since poor Chicago itself
vanished out of the world on wings of fire.  There is something
huge, painful, and almost appalling to me in that wild Western
World of yours;--and especially I wonder at the gold-nuggeting
there, while plainly every gold-nuggeter is no other than a
criminal to Human Society, and has to _steal_ the exact value of
his gold nugget from the pockets of all the posterity of Adam,
now and for some time to come, in this world.  I conclude it is a
bait used by All-wise Providence to attract your people out
thither, there to build towns, make roads, fell forests (or plant
forests), and make ready a Dwelling-place for new Nations, who
will find themselves called to quite other than nugget-hunting.
In the hideous stew of Anarchy, in which all English Populations
present themselves to my dismal contemplation at this day, it is
a solid consolation that there will verily, in another fifty
years, be above a hundred million men and women on this Planet
who can all read Shakespeare and the English Bible and the (also
for a long time biblical and noble) history of their Mother
Country,--and proceed again to do, unless the Devil be in them,
as their Forebears did, or better, if they have the heart!--

Except that you are a thousand times too kind to me, your second
Letter also was altogether charming....

Do you read Ruskin's _Fors Clavigera,_ which he cheerily tells me
gets itself reprinted in America?  If you don't, _do,_ I advise
you.  Also his _Munera Pulveris,_ Oxford-_Lectures_ on Art, and
whatever else he is now writing,--if you can manage to get them
(which is difficult here, owing to the ways he has towards the
bibliopolic world!).  There is nothing going on among us as
notable to me as those fierce lightning-bolts Ruskin is copiously
and desperately pouring into the black world of Anarchy all
around him.  No other man in England that I meet has in him the
divine rage against iniquity, falsity, and baseness that Ruskin
has, and that every man ought to have.  Unhappily he is not a
strong man;  one might say a weak man rather;  and has not the
least prudence of management;  though if he can hold out for
another fifteen years or so, he may produce, even in this way, a
great effect.  God grant it, say I.  Froude is coming to you in
October.  You will find him a most clear, friendly, ingenious,
solid, and excellent man;  and I am very glad to find you among
those who are to take care of him when he comes to your new
Country.  Do your best and wisest towards him, for my sake,
withal.  He is the valuablest Friend I now have in England,
nearly though not quite altogether the one man in talking with
whom I can get any real profit or comfort.  Alas, alas, here is
the end of the paper, dear Emerson;  and I had still a whole
wilderness of things to say.  Write to me, or even do not write,
and I will surely write again.

I remain as ever Your Affectionate Friend,
T. Carlyle